<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Comic Muse</span></h2>
    <p>
      The company&rsquo;s entrance into the township of Guichen, if not exactly
      triumphal, as Binet had expressed the desire that it should be, was at
      least sufficiently startling and cacophonous to set the rustics gaping. To
      them these fantastic creatures appeared&mdash;as indeed they were&mdash;beings
      from another world.
    </p>
    <p>
      First went the great travelling chaise, creaking and groaning on its way,
      drawn by two of the Flemish horses. It was Pantaloon who drove it, an
      obese and massive Pantaloon in a tight-fitting suit of scarlet under a
      long brown bed-gown, his countenance adorned by a colossal cardboard nose.
      Beside him on the box sat Pierrot in a white smock, with sleeves that
      completely covered his hands, loose white trousers, and a black skull-cap.
      He had whitened his face with flour, and he made hideous noises with a
      trumpet.
    </p>
    <p>
      On the roof of the coach were assembled Polichinelle, Scaramouche,
      Harlequin, and Pasquariel. Polichinelle in black and white, his doublet
      cut in the fashion of a century ago, with humps before and behind, a white
      frill round his neck and a black mask upon the upper half of his face,
      stood in the middle, his feet planted wide to steady him, solemnly and
      viciously banging a big drum. The other three were seated each at one of
      the corners of the roof, their legs dangling over. Scaramouche, all in
      black in the Spanish fashion of the seventeenth century, his face adorned
      with a pair of mostachios, jangled a guitar discordantly. Harlequin,
      ragged and patched in every colour of the rainbow, with his leather girdle
      and sword of lath, the upper half of his face smeared in soot, clashed a
      pair of cymbals intermittently. Pasquariel, as an apothecary in skull-cap
      and white apron, excited the hilarity of the onlookers by his enormous tin
      clyster, which emitted when pumped a dolorous squeak.
    </p>
    <p>
      Within the chaise itself, but showing themselves freely at the windows,
      and exchanging quips with the townsfolk, sat the three ladies of the
      company. Climene, the amoureuse, beautifully gowned in flowered satin, her
      own clustering ringlets concealed under a pumpkin-shaped wig, looked so
      much the lady of fashion that you might have wondered what she was doing
      in that fantastic rabble. Madame, as the mother, was also dressed with
      splendour, but exaggerated to achieve the ridiculous. Her headdress was a
      monstrous structure adorned with flowers, and superimposed by little
      ostrich plumes. Columbine sat facing them, her back to the horses, falsely
      demure, in milkmaid bonnet of white muslin, and a striped gown of green
      and blue.
    </p>
    <p>
      The marvel was that the old chaise, which in its halcyon days may have
      served to carry some dignitary of the Church, did not founder instead of
      merely groaning under that excessive and ribald load.
    </p>
    <p>
      Next came the house on wheels, led by the long, lean Rhodomont, who had
      daubed his face red, and increased the terror of it by a pair of
      formidable mostachios. He was in long thigh-boots and leather jerkin,
      trailing an enormous sword from a crimson baldrick. He wore a broad felt
      hat with a draggled feather, and as he advanced he raised his great voice
      and roared out defiance, and threats of blood-curdling butchery to be
      performed upon all and sundry. On the roof of this vehicle sat Leandre
      alone. He was in blue satin, with ruffles, small sword, powdered hair,
      patches and spy-glass, and red-heeled shoes: the complete courtier,
      looking very handsome. The women of Guichen ogled him coquettishly. He
      took the ogling as a proper tribute to his personal endowments, and
      returned it with interest. Like Climene, he looked out of place amid the
      bandits who composed the remainder of the company.
    </p>
    <p>
      Bringing up the rear came Andre-Louis leading the two donkeys that dragged
      the property-cart. He had insisted upon assuming a false nose,
      representing as for embellishment that which he intended for disguise. For
      the rest, he had retained his own garments. No one paid any attention to
      him as he trudged along beside his donkeys, an insignificant rear guard,
      which he was well content to be.
    </p>
    <p>
      They made the tour of the town, in which the activity was already above
      the normal in preparation for next week&rsquo;s fair. At intervals they halted,
      the cacophony would cease abruptly, and Polichinelle would announce in a
      stentorian voice that at five o&rsquo;clock that evening in the old market, M.
      Binet&rsquo;s famous company of improvisers would perform a new comedy in four
      acts entitled, &ldquo;The Heartless Father.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus at last they came to the old market, which was the groundfloor of the
      town hall, and open to the four winds by two archways on each side of its
      length, and one archway on each side of its breadth. These archways, with
      two exceptions, had been boarded up. Through those two, which gave
      admission to what presently would be the theatre, the ragamuffins of the
      town, and the niggards who were reluctant to spend the necessary sous to
      obtain proper admission, might catch furtive glimpses of the performance.
    </p>
    <p>
      That afternoon was the most strenuous of Andre-Louis&rsquo; life, unaccustomed
      as he was to any sort of manual labour. It was spent in erecting and
      preparing the stage at one end of the market-hall; and he began to realize
      how hard-earned were to be his monthly fifteen livres. At first there were
      four of them to the task&mdash;or really three, for Pantaloon did no more
      than bawl directions. Stripped of their finery, Rhodomont and Leandre
      assisted Andre-Louis in that carpentering. Meanwhile the other four were
      at dinner with the ladies. When a half-hour or so later they came to carry
      on the work, Andre-Louis and his companions went to dine in their turn,
      leaving Polichinelle to direct the operations as well as assist in them.
    </p>
    <p>
      They crossed the square to the cheap little inn where they had taken up
      their quarters. In the narrow passage Andre-Louis came face to face with
      Climene, her fine feathers cast, and restored by now to her normal
      appearance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And how do you like it?&rdquo; she asked him, pertly.
    </p>
    <p>
      He looked her in the eyes. &ldquo;It has its compensations,&rdquo; quoth he, in that
      curious cold tone of his that left one wondering whether he meant or not
      what he seemed to mean.
    </p>
    <p>
      She knit her brows. &ldquo;You... you feel the need of compensations already?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Faith, I felt it from the beginning,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;It was the perception of
      them allured me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were quite alone, the others having gone on into the room set apart
      for them, where food was spread. Andre-Louis, who was as unlearned in
      Woman as he was learned in Man, was not to know, upon feeling himself
      suddenly extraordinarily aware of her femininity, that it was she who in
      some subtle, imperceptible manner so rendered him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What,&rdquo; she asked him, with demurest innocence, &ldquo;are these compensations?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He caught himself upon the brink of the abyss.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fifteen livres a month,&rdquo; said he, abruptly.
    </p>
    <p>
      A moment she stared at him bewildered. He was very disconcerting. Then she
      recovered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, and bed and board,&rdquo; said she. &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t be leaving that from the
      reckoning, as you seem to be doing; for your dinner will be going cold.
      Aren&rsquo;t you coming?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t you dined?&rdquo; he cried, and she wondered had she caught a note of
      eagerness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; she answered, over her shoulder. &ldquo;I waited.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What for?&rdquo; quoth his innocence, hopefully.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had to change, of course, zany,&rdquo; she answered, rudely. Having dragged
      him, as she imagined, to the chopping-block, she could not refrain from
      chopping. But then he was of those who must be chopping back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you left your manners upstairs with your grand-lady clothes,
      mademoiselle. I understand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A scarlet flame suffused her face. &ldquo;You are very insolent,&rdquo; she said,
      lamely.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ve often been told so. But I don&rsquo;t believe it.&rdquo; He thrust open the door
      for her, and bowing with an air which imposed upon her, although it was
      merely copied from Fleury of the Comedie Francaise, so often visited in
      the Louis le Grand days, he waved her in. &ldquo;After you, ma demoiselle.&rdquo; For
      greater emphasis he deliberately broke the word into its two component
      parts.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I thank you, monsieur,&rdquo; she answered, frostily, as near sneering as was
      possible to so charming a person, and went in, nor addressed him again
      throughout the meal. Instead, she devoted herself with an unusual and
      devastating assiduity to the suspiring Leandre, that poor devil who could
      not successfully play the lover with her on the stage because of his
      longing to play it in reality.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis ate his herrings and black bread with a good appetite
      nevertheless. It was poor fare, but then poor fare was the common lot of
      poor people in that winter of starvation, and since he had cast in his
      fortunes with a company whose affairs were not flourishing, he must accept
      the evils of the situation philosophically.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you a name?&rdquo; Binet asked him once in the course of that repast and
      during a pause in the conversation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It happens that I have,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;I think it is Parvissimus.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Parvissimus?&rdquo; quoth Binet. &ldquo;Is that a family name?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In such a company, where only the leader enjoys the privilege of a family
      name, the like would be unbecoming its least member. So I take the name
      that best becomes in me. And I think it is Parvissimus&mdash;the very
      least.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Binet was amused. It was droll; it showed a ready fancy. Oh, to be sure,
      they must get to work together on those scenarios.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall prefer it to carpentering,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. Nevertheless he had
      to go back to it that afternoon, and to labour strenuously until four
      o&rsquo;clock, when at last the autocratic Binet announced himself satisfied
      with the preparations, and proceeded, again with the help of Andre-Louis,
      to prepare the lights, which were supplied partly by tallow candles and
      partly by lamps burning fish-oil.
    </p>
    <p>
      At five o&rsquo;clock that evening the three knocks were sounded, and the
      curtain rose on &ldquo;The Heartless Father.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Among the duties inherited by Andre-Louis from the departed Felicien whom
      he replaced, was that of doorkeeper. This duty he discharged dressed in a
      Polichinelle costume, and wearing a pasteboard nose. It was an arrangement
      mutually agreeable to M. Binet and himself. M. Binet&mdash;who had taken
      the further precaution of retaining Andre-Louis&rsquo; own garments&mdash;was
      thereby protected against the risk of his latest recruit absconding with
      the takings. Andre-Louis, without illusions on the score of Pantaloon&rsquo;s
      real object, agreed to it willingly enough, since it protected him from
      the chance of recognition by any acquaintance who might possibly be in
      Guichen.
    </p>
    <p>
      The performance was in every sense unexciting; the audience meagre and
      unenthusiastic. The benches provided in the front half of the market
      contained some twenty-seven persons: eleven at twenty sous a head and
      sixteen at twelve. Behind these stood a rabble of some thirty others at
      six sous apiece. Thus the gross takings were two louis, ten livres, and
      two sous. By the time M. Binet had paid for the use of the market, his
      lights, and the expenses of his company at the inn over Sunday, there was
      not likely to be very much left towards the wages of his players. It is
      not surprising, therefore, that M. Binet&rsquo;s bonhomie should have been a
      trifle overcast that evening.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what do you think of it?&rdquo; he asked Andre-Louis, as they were walking
      back to the inn after the performance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Possibly it could have been worse; probably it could not,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      In sheer amazement M. Binet checked in his stride, and turned to look at
      his companion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Huh!&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;Dieu de Dien! But you are frank.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;An unpopular form of service among fools, I know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, I am not a fool,&rdquo; said Binet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is why I am frank. I pay you the compliment of assuming intelligence
      in you, M. Binet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, you do?&rdquo; quoth M. Binet. &ldquo;And who the devil are you to assume
      anything? Your assumptions are presumptuous, sir.&rdquo; And with that he lapsed
      into silence and the gloomy business of mentally casting up his accounts.
    </p>
    <p>
      But at table over supper a half-hour later he revived the topic.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Our latest recruit, this excellent M. Parvissimus,&rdquo; he announced, &ldquo;has
      the impudence to tell me that possibly our comedy could have been worse,
      but that probably it could not.&rdquo; And he blew out his great round cheeks to
      invite a laugh at the expense of that foolish critic.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s bad,&rdquo; said the swarthy and sardonic Polichinelle. He was grave as
      Rhadamanthus pronouncing judgment. &ldquo;That&rsquo;s bad. But what is infinitely
      worse is that the audience had the impudence to be of the same mind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;An ignorant pack of clods,&rdquo; sneered Leandre, with a toss of his handsome
      head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are wrong,&rdquo; quoth Harlequin. &ldquo;You were born for love, my dear, not
      criticism.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Leandre&mdash;a dull dog, as you will have conceived&mdash;looked
      contemptuously down upon the little man. &ldquo;And you, what were you born
      for?&rdquo; he wondered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nobody knows,&rdquo; was the candid admission. &ldquo;Nor yet why. It is the case of
      many of us, my dear, believe me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why&rdquo;&mdash;M. Binet took him up, and thus spoilt the beginnings of a
      very pretty quarrel&mdash;&ldquo;why do you say that Leandre is wrong?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To be general, because he is always wrong. To be particular, because I
      judge the audience of Guichen to be too sophisticated for &lsquo;The Heartless
      Father.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You would put it more happily,&rdquo; interposed Andre-Louis&mdash;who was the
      cause of this discussion&mdash;&ldquo;if you said that &lsquo;The Heartless Father&rsquo; is
      too unsophisticated for the audience of Guichen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, what&rsquo;s the difference?&rdquo; asked Leandre.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I didn&rsquo;t imply a difference. I merely suggested that it is a happier way
      to express the fact.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The gentleman is being subtle,&rdquo; sneered Binet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why happier?&rdquo; Harlequin demanded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because it is easier to bring &lsquo;The Heartless Father&rsquo; to the
      sophistication of the Guichen audience, than the Guichen audience to the
      unsophistication of &lsquo;The Heartless Father.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me think it out,&rdquo; groaned Polichinelle, and he took his head in his
      hands.
    </p>
    <p>
      But from the tail of the table Andre-Louis was challenged by Climene who
      sat there between Columbine and Madame.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You would alter the comedy, would you, M. Parvissimus?&rdquo; she cried.
    </p>
    <p>
      He turned to parry her malice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I would suggest that it be altered,&rdquo; he corrected, inclining his head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And how would you alter it, monsieur?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I? Oh, for the better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But of course!&rdquo; She was sleekest sarcasm. &ldquo;And how would you do it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aye, tell us that,&rdquo; roared M. Binet, and added: &ldquo;Silence, I pray you,
      gentlemen and ladies. Silence for M. Parvissimus.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis looked from father to daughter, and smiled. &ldquo;Pardi!&rdquo; said he.
      &ldquo;I am between bludgeon and dagger. If I escape with my life, I shall be
      fortunate. Why, then, since you pin me to the very wall, I&rsquo;ll tell you
      what I should do. I should go back to the original and help myself more
      freely from it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The original?&rdquo; questioned M. Binet&mdash;the author.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is called, I believe, &lsquo;Monsieur de Pourceaugnac,&rsquo; and was written by
      Moliere.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Somebody tittered, but that somebody was not M. Binet. He had been touched
      on the raw, and the look in his little eyes betrayed the fact that his
      bonhomme exterior covered anything but a bonhomme.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You charge me with plagiarism,&rdquo; he said at last; &ldquo;with filching the ideas
      of Moliere.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is always, of course,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, unruffled, &ldquo;the
      alternative possibility of two great minds working upon parallel lines.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. Binet studied the young man attentively a moment. He found him bland
      and inscrutable, and decided to pin him down.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you do not imply that I have been stealing from Moliere?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I advise you to do so, monsieur,&rdquo; was the disconcerting reply.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. Binet was shocked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You advise me to do so! You advise me, me, Antoine Binet, to turn thief
      at my age!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is outrageous,&rdquo; said mademoiselle, indignantly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Outrageous is the word. I thank you for it, my dear. I take you on trust,
      sir. You sit at my table, you have the honour to be included in my
      company, and to my face you have the audacity to advise me to become a
      thief&mdash;the worst kind of thief that is conceivable, a thief of
      spiritual things, a thief of ideas! It is insufferable, intolerable! I
      have been, I fear, deeply mistaken in you, monsieur; just as you appear to
      have been mistaken in me. I am not the scoundrel you suppose me, sir, and
      I will not number in my company a man who dares to suggest that I should
      become one. Outrageous!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was very angry. His voice boomed through the little room, and the
      company sat hushed and something scared, their eyes upon Andre-Louis, who
      was the only one entirely unmoved by this outburst of virtuous
      indignation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You realize, monsieur,&rdquo; he said, very quietly, &ldquo;that you are insulting
      the memory of the illustrious dead?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh?&rdquo; said Binet.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis developed his sophistries.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You insult the memory of Moliere, the greatest ornament of our stage, one
      of the greatest ornaments of our nation, when you suggest that there is
      vileness in doing that which he never hesitated to do, which no great
      author yet has hesitated to do. You cannot suppose that Moliere ever
      troubled himself to be original in the matter of ideas. You cannot suppose
      that the stories he tells in his plays have never been told before. They
      were culled, as you very well know&mdash;though you seem momentarily to
      have forgotten it, and it is therefore necessary that I should remind you&mdash;they
      were culled, many of them, from the Italian authors, who themselves had
      culled them Heaven alone knows where. Moliere took those old stories and
      retold them in his own language. That is precisely what I am suggesting
      that you should do. Your company is a company of improvisers. You supply
      the dialogue as you proceed, which is rather more than Moliere ever
      attempted. You may, if you prefer it&mdash;though it would seem to me to
      be yielding to an excess of scruple&mdash;go straight to Boccaccio or
      Sacchetti. But even then you cannot be sure that you have reached the
      sources.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis came off with flying colours after that. You see what a
      debater was lost in him; how nimble he was in the art of making white look
      black. The company was impressed, and no one more that M. Binet, who found
      himself supplied with a crushing argument against those who in future
      might tax him with the impudent plagiarisms which he undoubtedly
      perpetrated. He retired in the best order he could from the position he
      had taken up at the outset.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So that you think,&rdquo; he said, at the end of a long outburst of agreement,
      &ldquo;you think that our story of &lsquo;The Heartless Father&rsquo; could be enriched by
      dipping into &lsquo;Monsieur de Pourceaugnac,&rsquo; to which I confess upon
      reflection that it may present certain superficial resemblances?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do; most certainly I do&mdash;always provided that you do so
      judiciously. Times have changed since Moliere.&rdquo; It was as a consequence of
      this that Binet retired soon after, taking Andre-Louis with him. The pair
      sat together late that night, and were again in close communion throughout
      the whole of Sunday morning.
    </p>
    <p>
      After dinner M. Binet read to the assembled company the amended and
      amplified canevas of &ldquo;The Heartless Father,&rdquo; which, acting upon the advice
      of M. Parvissimus, he had been at great pains to prepare. The company had
      few doubts as to the real authorship before he began to read; none at all
      when he had read. There was a verve, a grip about this story; and, what
      was more, those of them who knew their Moliere realized that far from
      approaching the original more closely, this canevas had drawn farther away
      from it. Moliere&rsquo;s original part&mdash;the title role&mdash;had dwindled
      into insignificance, to the great disgust of Polichinelle, to whom it
      fell. But the other parts had all been built up into importance, with the
      exception of Leandre, who remained as before. The two great roles were now
      Scaramouche, in the character of the intriguing Sbrigandini, and Pantaloon
      the father. There was, too, a comical part for Rhodomont, as the roaring
      bully hired by Polichinelle to cut Leandre into ribbons. And in view of
      the importance now of Scaramouche, the play had been rechristened
      &ldquo;Figaro-Scaramouche.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      This last had not been without a deal of opposition from M. Binet. But his
      relentless collaborator, who was in reality the real author&mdash;drawing
      shamelessly, but practically at last upon his great store of reading&mdash;had
      overborne him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must move with the times, monsieur. In Paris Beaumarchais is the
      rage. &lsquo;Figaro&rsquo; is known to-day throughout the world. Let us borrow a
      little of his glory. It will draw the people in. They will come to see
      half a &lsquo;Figaro&rsquo; when they will not come to see a dozen &lsquo;Heartless
      Fathers.&rsquo; Therefore let us cast the mantle of Figaro upon some one, and
      proclaim it in our title.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But as I am the head of the company...&rdquo; began M. Binet, weakly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you will be blind to your interests, you will presently be a head
      without a body. And what use is that? Can the shoulders of Pantaloon carry
      the mantle of Figaro? You laugh. Of course you laugh. The notion is
      absurd. The proper person for the mantle of Figaro is Scaramouche, who is
      naturally Figaro&rsquo;s twin-brother.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus tyrannized, the tyrant Binet gave way, comforted by the reflection
      that if he understood anything at all about the theatre, he had for
      fifteen livres a month acquired something that would presently be earning
      him as many louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      The company&rsquo;s reception of the canevas now confirmed him, if we except
      Polichinelle, who, annoyed at having lost half his part in the
      alterations, declared the new scenario fatuous.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! You call my work fatuous, do you?&rdquo; M. Binet hectored him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your work?&rdquo; said Polichinelle, to add with his tongue in his cheek: &ldquo;Ah,
      pardon. I had not realized that you were the author.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then realize it now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You were very close with M. Parvissimus over this authorship,&rdquo; said
      Polichinelle, with impudent suggestiveness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what if I was? What do you imply?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That you took him to cut quills for you, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll cut your ears for you if you&rsquo;re not civil,&rdquo; stormed the infuriated
      Binet.
    </p>
    <p>
      Polichinelle got up slowly, and stretched himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Dieu de Dieu!&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;If Pantaloon is to play Rhodomont, I think I&rsquo;ll
      leave you. He is not amusing in the part.&rdquo; And he swaggered out before M.
      Binet had recovered from his speechlessness.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
