<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Trespassers</span></h2>
    <p>
      Coming presently upon the Redon road, Andre-Louis, obeying instinct rather
      than reason, turned his face to the south, and plodded wearily and
      mechanically forward. He had no clear idea of whither he was going, or of
      whither he should go. All that imported at the moment was to put as great
      a distance as possible between Gavrillac and himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had a vague, half-formed notion of returning to Nantes; and there, by
      employing the newly found weapon of his oratory, excite the people into
      sheltering him as the first victim of the persecution he had foreseen, and
      against which he had sworn them to take up arms. But the idea was one
      which he entertained merely as an indefinite possibility upon which he
      felt no real impulse to act.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile he chuckled at the thought of Fresnel as he had last seen him,
      with his muffled face and glaring eyeballs. &ldquo;For one who was anything but
      a man of action,&rdquo; he writes, &ldquo;I felt that I had acquitted myself none so
      badly.&rdquo; It is a phrase that recurs at intervals in his sketchy
      &ldquo;Confessions.&rdquo; Constantly is he reminding you that he is a man of mental
      and not physical activities, and apologizing when dire necessity drives
      him into acts of violence. I suspect this insistence upon his philosophic
      detachment&mdash;for which I confess he had justification enough&mdash;to
      betray his besetting vanity.
    </p>
    <p>
      With increasing fatigue came depression and self-criticism. He had
      stupidly overshot his mark in insultingly denouncing M. de Lesdiguieres.
      &ldquo;It is much better,&rdquo; he says somewhere, &ldquo;to be wicked than to be stupid.
      Most of this world&rsquo;s misery is the fruit not as priests tell us of
      wickedness, but of stupidity.&rdquo; And we know that of all stupidities he
      considered anger the most deplorable. Yet he had permitted himself to be
      angry with a creature like M. de Lesdiguieres&mdash;a lackey, a fribble, a
      nothing, despite his potentialities for evil. He could perfectly have
      discharged his self-imposed mission without arousing the vindictive
      resentment of the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant.
    </p>
    <p>
      He beheld himself vaguely launched upon life with the riding-suit in which
      he stood, a single louis d&rsquo;or and a few pieces of silver for all capital,
      and a knowledge of law which had been inadequate to preserve him from the
      consequences of infringing it.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had, in addition&mdash;but these things that were to be the real
      salvation of him he did not reckon&mdash;his gift of laughter, sadly
      repressed of late, and the philosophic outlook and mercurial temperament
      which are the stock-in-trade of your adventurer in all ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile he tramped mechanically on through the night, until he felt that
      he could tramp no more. He had skirted the little township of Guichen, and
      now within a half-mile of Guignen, and with Gavrillac a good seven miles
      behind him, his legs refused to carry him any farther.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was midway across the vast common to the north of Guignen when he came
      to a halt. He had left the road, and taken heedlessly to the footpath that
      struck across the waste of indifferent pasture interspersed with clumps of
      gorse. A stone&rsquo;s throw away on his right the common was bordered by a
      thorn hedge. Beyond this loomed a tall building which he knew to be an
      open barn, standing on the edge of a long stretch of meadowland. That
      dark, silent shadow it may have been that had brought him to a standstill,
      suggesting shelter to his subconsciousness. A moment he hesitated; then he
      struck across towards a spot where a gap in the hedge was closed by a
      five-barred gate. He pushed the gate open, went through the gap, and stood
      now before the barn. It was as big as a house, yet consisted of no more
      than a roof carried upon half a dozen tall, brick pillars. But densely
      packed under that roof was a great stack of hay that promised a warm couch
      on so cold a night. Stout timbers had been built into the brick pillars,
      with projecting ends to serve as ladders by which the labourer might climb
      to pack or withdraw hay. With what little strength remained him,
      Andre-Louis climbed by one of these and landed safely at the top, where he
      was forced to kneel, for lack of room to stand upright. Arrived there, he
      removed his coat and neckcloth, his sodden boots and stockings. Next he
      cleared a trough for his body, and lying down in it, covered himself to
      the neck with the hay he had removed. Within five minutes he was lost to
      all worldly cares and soundly asleep.
    </p>
    <p>
      When next he awakened, the sun was already high in the heavens, from which
      he concluded that the morning was well advanced; and this before he
      realized quite where he was or how he came there. Then to his awakening
      senses came a drone of voices close at hand, to which at first he paid
      little heed. He was deliciously refreshed, luxuriously drowsy and
      luxuriously warm.
    </p>
    <p>
      But as consciousness and memory grew more full, he raised his head clear
      of the hay that he might free both ears to listen, his pulses faintly
      quickened by the nascent fear that those voices might bode him no good.
      Then he caught the reassuring accents of a woman, musical and silvery,
      though laden with alarm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, mon Dieu, Leandre, let us separate at once. If it should be my
      father...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And upon this a man&rsquo;s voice broke in, calm and reassuring:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no, Climene; you are mistaken. There is no one coming. We are quite
      safe. Why do you start at shadows?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, Leandre, if he should find us here together! I tremble at the very
      thought.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      More was not needed to reassure Andre-Louis. He had overheard enough to
      know that this was but the case of a pair of lovers who, with less to fear
      of life, were yet&mdash;after the manner of their kind&mdash;more timid of
      heart than he. Curiosity drew him from his warm trough to the edge of the
      hay. Lying prone, he advanced his head and peered down.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the space of cropped meadow between the barn and the hedge stood a man
      and a woman, both young. The man was a well-set-up, comely fellow, with a
      fine head of chestnut hair tied in a queue by a broad bow of black satin.
      He was dressed with certain tawdry attempts at ostentatious
      embellishments, which did not prepossess one at first glance in his
      favour. His coat of a fashionable cut was of faded plum-coloured velvet
      edged with silver lace, whose glory had long since departed. He affected
      ruffles, but for want of starch they hung like weeping willows over hands
      that were fine and delicate. His breeches were of plain black cloth, and
      his black stockings were of cotton&mdash;matters entirely out of harmony
      with his magnificent coat. His shoes, stout and serviceable, were decked
      with buckles of cheap, lack-lustre paste. But for his engaging and
      ingenuous countenance, Andre-Louis must have set him down as a knight of
      that order which lives dishonestly by its wits. As it was, he suspended
      judgment whilst pushing investigation further by a study of the girl. At
      the outset, be it confessed that it was a study that attracted him
      prodigiously. And this notwithstanding the fact that, bookish and studious
      as were his ways, and in despite of his years, it was far from his habit
      to waste consideration on femininity.
    </p>
    <p>
      The child&mdash;she was no more than that, perhaps twenty at the most&mdash;possessed,
      in addition to the allurements of face and shape that went very near
      perfection, a sparkling vivacity and a grace of movement the like of which
      Andre-Louis did not remember ever before to have beheld assembled in one
      person. And her voice too&mdash;that musical, silvery voice that had
      awakened him&mdash;possessed in its exquisite modulations an allurement of
      its own that must have been irresistible, he thought, in the ugliest of
      her sex. She wore a hooded mantle of green cloth, and the hood being
      thrown back, her dainty head was all revealed to him. There were glints of
      gold struck by the morning sun from her light nut-brown hair that hung in
      a cluster of curls about her oval face. Her complexion was of a delicacy
      that he could compare only with a rose petal. He could not at that
      distance discern the colour of her eyes, but he guessed them blue, as he
      admired the sparkle of them under the fine, dark line of eyebrows.
    </p>
    <p>
      He could not have told you why, but he was conscious that it aggrieved him
      to find her so intimate with this pretty young fellow, who was partly
      clad, as it appeared, in the cast-offs of a nobleman. He could not guess
      her station, but the speech that reached him was cultured in tone and
      word. He strained to listen.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall know no peace, Leandre, until we are safely wedded,&rdquo; she was
      saying. &ldquo;Not until then shall I count myself beyond his reach. And yet if
      we marry without his consent, we but make trouble for ourselves, and of
      gaining his consent I almost despair.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Evidently, thought Andre-Louis, her father was a man of sense, who saw
      through the shabby finery of M. Leandre, and was not to be dazzled by
      cheap paste buckles.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Climene,&rdquo; the young man was answering her, standing squarely
      before her, and holding both her hands, &ldquo;you are wrong to despond. If I do
      not reveal to you all the stratagem that I have prepared to win the
      consent of your unnatural parent, it is because I am loath to rob you of
      the pleasure of the surprise that is in store. But place your faith in me,
      and in that ingenious friend of whom I have spoken, and who should be here
      at any moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The stilted ass! Had he learnt that speech by heart in advance, or was he
      by nature a pedantic idiot who expressed himself in this set and formal
      manner? How came so sweet a blossom to waste her perfumes on such a prig?
      And what a ridiculous name the creature owned!
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus Andre-Louis to himself from his observatory. Meanwhile, she was
      speaking.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is what my heart desires, Leandre, but I am beset by fears lest your
      stratagem should be too late. I am to marry this horrible Marquis of
      Sbrufadelli this very day. He arrives by noon. He comes to sign the
      contract&mdash;to make me the Marchioness of Sbrufadelli. Oh!&rdquo; It was a
      cry of pain from that tender young heart. &ldquo;The very name burns my lips. If
      it were mine I could never utter it&mdash;never! The man is so detestable.
      Save me, Leandre. Save me! You are my only hope.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis was conscious of a pang of disappointment. She failed to soar
      to the heights he had expected of her. She was evidently infected by the
      stilted manner of her ridiculous lover. There was an atrocious lack of
      sincerity about her words. They touched his mind, but left his heart
      unmoved. Perhaps this was because of his antipathy to M. Leandre and to
      the issue involved.
    </p>
    <p>
      So her father was marrying her to a marquis! That implied birth on her
      side. And yet she was content to pair off with this dull young adventurer
      in the tarnished lace! It was, he supposed, the sort of thing to be
      expected of a sex that all philosophy had taught him to regard as the
      maddest part of a mad species.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It shall never be!&rdquo; M. Leandre was storming passionately. &ldquo;Never! I swear
      it!&rdquo; And he shook his puny fist at the blue vault of heaven&mdash;Ajax
      defying Jupiter. &ldquo;Ah, but here comes our subtle friend...&rdquo; (Andre-Louis
      did not catch the name, M. Leandre having at that moment turned to face
      the gap in the hedge.) &ldquo;He will bring us news, I know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis looked also in the direction of the gap. Through it emerged a
      lean, slight man in a rusty cloak and a three-cornered hat worn well down
      over his nose so as to shade his face. And when presently he doffed this
      hat and made a sweeping bow to the young lovers, Andre-Louis confessed to
      himself that had he been cursed with such a hangdog countenance he would
      have worn his hat in precisely such a manner, so as to conceal as much of
      it as possible. If M. Leandre appeared to be wearing, in part at least,
      the cast-offs of nobleman, the newcomer appeared to be wearing the
      cast-offs of M. Leandre. Yet despite his vile clothes and viler face, with
      its three days&rsquo; growth of beard, the fellow carried himself with a certain
      air; he positively strutted as he advanced, and he made a leg in a manner
      that was courtly and practised.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monsieur,&rdquo; said he, with the air of a conspirator, &ldquo;the time for action
      has arrived, and so has the Marquis... That is why.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young lovers sprang apart in consternation; Climene with clasped
      hands, parted lips, and a bosom that raced distractingly under its white
      fichu-menteur; M. Leandre agape, the very picture of foolishness and
      dismay.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile the newcomer rattled on. &ldquo;I was at the inn an hour ago when he
      descended there, and I studied him attentively whilst he was at breakfast.
      Having done so, not a single doubt remains me of our success. As for what
      he looks like, I could entertain you at length upon the fashion in which
      nature has designed his gross fatuity. But that is no matter. We are
      concerned with what he is, with the wit of him. And I tell you confidently
      that I find him so dull and stupid that you may be confident he will
      tumble headlong into each and all of the traps I have so cunningly
      prepared for him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me, tell me! Speak!&rdquo; Climene implored him, holding out her hands in
      a supplication no man of sensibility could have resisted. And then on the
      instant she caught her breath on a faint scream. &ldquo;My father!&rdquo; she
      exclaimed, turning distractedly from one to the other of those two. &ldquo;He is
      coming! We are lost!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must fly, Climene!&rdquo; said M. Leandre.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Too late!&rdquo; she sobbed. &ldquo;Too late! He is here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Calm, mademoiselle, calm!&rdquo; the subtle friend was urging her. &ldquo;Keep calm
      and trust to me. I promise you that all shall be well.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh!&rdquo; cried M. Leandre, limply. &ldquo;Say what you will, my friend, this is
      ruin&mdash;the end of all our hopes. Your wits will never extricate us
      from this. Never!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Through the gap strode now an enormous man with an inflamed moon face and
      a great nose, decently dressed after the fashion of a solid bourgeois.
      There was no mistaking his anger, but the expression that it found was an
      amazement to Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Leandre, you&rsquo;re an imbecile! Too much phlegm, too much phlegm! Your words
      wouldn&rsquo;t convince a ploughboy! Have you considered what they mean at all?
      Thus,&rdquo; he cried, and casting his round hat from him in a broad gesture, he
      took his stand at M. Leandre&rsquo;s side, and repeated the very words that
      Leandre had lately uttered, what time the three observed him coolly and
      attentively.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, say what you will, my friend, this is ruin&mdash;the end of all our
      hopes. Your wits will never extricate us from this. Never!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      A frenzy of despair vibrated in his accents. He swung again to face M.
      Leandre. &ldquo;Thus,&rdquo; he bade him contemptuously. &ldquo;Let the passion of your
      hopelessness express itself in your voice. Consider that you are not
      asking Scaramouche here whether he has put a patch in your breeches. You
      are a despairing lover expressing...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He checked abruptly, startled. Andre-Louis, suddenly realizing what was
      afoot, and how duped he had been, had loosed his laughter. The sound of it
      pealing and booming uncannily under the great roof that so immediately
      confined him was startling to those below.
    </p>
    <p>
      The fat man was the first to recover, and he announced it after his own
      fashion in one of the ready sarcasms in which he habitually dealt.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hark!&rdquo; he cried, &ldquo;the very gods laugh at you, Leandre.&rdquo; Then he addressed
      the roof of the barn and its invisible tenant. &ldquo;Hi! You there!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis revealed himself by a further protrusion of his tousled head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-morning,&rdquo; said he, pleasantly. Rising now on his knees, his horizon
      was suddenly extended to include the broad common beyond the hedge. He
      beheld there an enormous and very battered travelling chaise, a cart piled
      up with timbers partly visible under the sheet of oiled canvas that
      covered them, and a sort of house on wheels equipped with a tin chimney,
      from which the smoke was slowly curling. Three heavy Flemish horses and a
      couple of donkeys&mdash;all of them hobbled&mdash;were contentedly
      cropping the grass in the neighbourhood of these vehicles. These, had he
      perceived them sooner, must have given him the clue to the queer scene
      that had been played under his eyes. Beyond the hedge other figures were
      moving. Three at that moment came crowding into the gap&mdash;a
      saucy-faced girl with a tip-tilted nose, whom he supposed to be Columbine,
      the soubrette; a lean, active youngster, who must be the lackey Harlequin;
      and another rather loutish youth who might be a zany or an apothecary.
    </p>
    <p>
      All this he took in at a comprehensive glance that consumed no more time
      than it had taken him to say good-morning. To that good-morning Pantaloon
      replied in a bellow:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What the devil are you doing up there?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Precisely the same thing that you are doing down there,&rdquo; was the answer.
      &ldquo;I am trespassing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh?&rdquo; said Pantaloon, and looked at his companions, some of the assurance
      beaten out of his big red face. Although the thing was one that they did
      habitually, to hear it called by its proper name was disconcerting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whose land is this?&rdquo; he asked, with diminishing assurance.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis answered, whilst drawing on his stockings. &ldquo;I believe it to be
      the property of the Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s a high-sounding name. Is the gentleman severe?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The gentleman,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, &ldquo;is the devil; or rather, I should
      prefer to say upon reflection, that the devil is a gentleman by
      comparison.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And yet,&rdquo; interposed the villainous-looking fellow who played
      Scaramouche, &ldquo;by your own confessing you don&rsquo;t hesitate, yourself, to
      trespass upon his property.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, but then, you see, I am a lawyer. And lawyers are notoriously unable
      to observe the law, just as actors are notoriously unable to act.
      Moreover, sir, Nature imposes her limits upon us, and Nature conquers
      respect for law as she conquers all else. Nature conquered me last night
      when I had got as far as this. And so I slept here without regard for the
      very high and puissant Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. At the same time, M.
      Scaramouche, you&rsquo;ll observe that I did not flaunt my trespass quite as
      openly as you and your companions.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Having donned his boots, Andre-Louis came nimbly to the ground in his
      shirt-sleeves, his riding-coat over his arm. As he stood there to don it,
      the little cunning eyes of the heavy father conned him in detail.
      Observing that his clothes, if plain, were of a good fashion, that his
      shirt was of fine cambric, and that he expressed himself like a man of
      culture, such as he claimed to be, M. Pantaloon was disposed to be civil.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am very grateful to you for the warning, sir...&rdquo; he was beginning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Act upon it, my friend. The gardes-champetres of M. d&rsquo;Azyr have orders to
      fire on trespassers. Imitate me, and decamp.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They followed him upon the instant through that gap in the hedge to the
      encampment on the common. There Andre-Louis took his leave of them. But as
      he was turning away he perceived a young man of the company performing his
      morning toilet at a bucket placed upon one of the wooden steps at the tail
      of the house on wheels. A moment he hesitated, then he turned frankly to
      M. Pantaloon, who was still at his elbow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If it were not unconscionable to encroach so far upon your hospitality,
      monsieur,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;I would beg leave to imitate that very excellent
      young gentleman before I leave you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But, my dear sir!&rdquo; Good-nature oozed out of every pore of the fat body of
      the master player. &ldquo;It is nothing at all. But, by all means. Rhodomont
      will provide what you require. He is the dandy of the company in real
      life, though a fire-eater on the stage. Hi, Rhodomont!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The young ablutionist straightened his long body from the right angle in
      which it had been bent over the bucket, and looked out through a foam of
      soapsuds. Pantaloon issued an order, and Rhodomont, who was indeed as
      gentle and amiable off the stage as he was formidable and terrible upon
      it, made the stranger free of the bucket in the friendliest manner.
    </p>
    <p>
      So Andre-Louis once more removed his neckcloth and his coat, and rolled up
      the sleeves of his fine shirt, whilst Rhodomont procured him soap, a
      towel, and presently a broken comb, and even a greasy hair-ribbon, in case
      the gentleman should have lost his own. This last Andre-Louis declined,
      but the comb he gratefully accepted, and having presently washed himself
      clean, stood, with the towel flung over his left shoulder, restoring order
      to his dishevelled locks before a broken piece of mirror affixed to the
      door of the travelling house.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was standing thus, the gentle Rhodomont babbled aimlessly at his side,
      when his ears caught the sound of hooves. He looked over his shoulder
      carelessly, and then stood frozen, with uplifted comb and loosened mouth.
      Away across the common, on the road that bordered it, he beheld a party of
      seven horsemen in the blue coats with red facings of the marechaussee.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not for a moment did he doubt what was the quarry of this prowling
      gendarmerie. It was as if the chill shadow of the gallows had fallen
      suddenly upon him.
    </p>
    <p>
      And then the troop halted, abreast with them, and the sergeant leading it
      sent his bawling voice across the common.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hi, there! Hi!&rdquo; His tone rang with menace.
    </p>
    <p>
      Every member of the company&mdash;and there were some twelve in all&mdash;stood
      at gaze. Pantaloon advanced a step or two, stalking, his head thrown back,
      his manner that of a King&rsquo;s Lieutenant.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Now, what the devil&rsquo;s this?&rdquo; quoth he, but whether of Fate or Heaven or
      the sergeant, was not clear.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a brief colloquy among the horsemen, then they came trotting
      across the common straight towards the players&rsquo; encampment.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis had remained standing at the tail of the travelling house. He
      was still passing the comb through his straggling hair, but mechanically
      and unconsciously. His mind was all intent upon the advancing troop, his
      wits alert and gathered together for a leap in whatever direction should
      be indicated.
    </p>
    <p>
      Still in the distance, but evidently impatient, the sergeant bawled a
      question.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who gave you leave to encamp here?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a question that reassured Andre-Louis not at all. He was not
      deceived by it into supposing or even hoping that the business of these
      men was merely to round up vagrants and trespassers. That was no part of
      their real duty; it was something done in passing&mdash;done, perhaps, in
      the hope of levying a tax of their own. It was very long odds that they
      were from Rennes, and that their real business was the hunting down of a
      young lawyer charged with sedition. Meanwhile Pantaloon was shouting back.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who gave us leave, do you say? What leave? This is communal land, free to
      all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The sergeant laughed unpleasantly, and came on, his troop following.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is,&rdquo; said a voice at Pantaloon&rsquo;s elbow, &ldquo;no such thing as communal
      land in the proper sense in all M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr&rsquo;s vast domain. This
      is a terre censive, and his bailiffs collect his dues from all who send
      their beasts to graze here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Pantaloon turned to behold at his side Andre-Louis in his shirt-sleeves,
      and without a neckcloth, the towel still trailing over his left shoulder,
      a comb in his hand, his hair half dressed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God of God!&rdquo; swore Pantaloon. &ldquo;But it is an ogre, this Marquis de La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have told you already what I think of him,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;As for
      these fellows you had better let me deal with them. I have experience of
      their kind.&rdquo; And without waiting for Pantaloon&rsquo;s consent, Andre-Louis
      stepped forward to meet the advancing men of the marechaussee. He had
      realized that here boldness alone could save him.
    </p>
    <p>
      When a moment later the sergeant pulled up his horse alongside of this
      half-dressed young man, Andre-Louis combed his hair what time he looked up
      with a half smile, intended to be friendly, ingenuous, and disarming.
    </p>
    <p>
      In spite of it the sergeant hailed him gruffly: &ldquo;Are you the leader of
      this troop of vagabonds?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes... that is to say, my father, there, is really the leader.&rdquo; And he
      jerked a thumb in the direction of M. Pantaloon, who stood at gaze out of
      earshot in the background. &ldquo;What is your pleasure, captain?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My pleasure is to tell you that you are very likely to be gaoled for
      this, all the pack of you.&rdquo; His voice was loud and bullying. It carried
      across the common to the ears of every member of the company, and brought
      them all to stricken attention where they stood. The lot of strolling
      players was hard enough without the addition of gaolings.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But how so, my captain? This is communal land free to all.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is nothing of the kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are the fences?&rdquo; quoth Andre-Louis, waving the hand that held the
      comb, as if to indicate the openness of the place.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fences!&rdquo; snorted the sergeant. &ldquo;What have fences to do with the matter?
      This is terre censive. There is no grazing here save by payment of dues to
      the Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But we are not grazing,&rdquo; quoth the innocent Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To the devil with you, zany! You are not grazing! But your beasts are
      grazing!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;They eat so little,&rdquo; Andre-Louis apologized, and again essayed his
      ingratiating smile.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sergeant grew more terrible than ever. &ldquo;That is not the point. The
      point is that you are committing what amounts to a theft, and there&rsquo;s the
      gaol for thieves.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Technically, I suppose you are right,&rdquo; sighed Andre-Louis, and fell to
      combing his hair again, still looking up into the sergeant&rsquo;s face. &ldquo;But we
      have sinned in ignorance. We are grateful to you for the warning.&rdquo; He
      passed the comb into his left hand, and with his right fumbled in his
      breeches&rsquo; pocket, whence there came a faint jingle of coins. &ldquo;We are
      desolated to have brought you out of your way. Perhaps for their trouble
      your men would honour us by stopping at the next inn to drink the health
      of... of this M. de La Tour d&rsquo; Azyr, or any other health that they think
      proper.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Some of the clouds lifted from the sergeant&rsquo;s brow. But not yet all.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, well,&rdquo; said he, gruffly. &ldquo;But you must decamp, you understand.&rdquo; He
      leaned from the saddle to bring his recipient hand to a convenient
      distance. Andre-Louis placed in it a three-livre piece.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In half an hour,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why in half an hour? Why not at once?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, but time to break our fast.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They looked at each other. The sergeant next considered the broad piece of
      silver in his palm. Then at last his features relaxed from their
      sternness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;After all,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;it is none of our business to play the tipstaves
      for M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. We are of the marechaussee from Rennes.&rdquo;
       Andre-Louis&rsquo; eyelids played him false by flickering. &ldquo;But if you linger,
      look out for the gardes-champetres of the Marquis. You&rsquo;ll find them not at
      all accommodating. Well, well&mdash;a good appetite to you, monsieur,&rdquo;
       said he, in valediction.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A pleasant ride, my captain,&rdquo; answered Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      The sergeant wheeled his horse about, his troop wheeled with him. They
      were starting off, when he reined up again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You, monsieur!&rdquo; he called over his shoulder. In a bound Andre-Louis was
      beside his stirrup. &ldquo;We are in quest of a scoundrel named Andre-Louis
      Moreau, from Gavrillac, a fugitive from justice wanted for the gallows on
      a matter of sedition. You&rsquo;ve seen nothing, I suppose, of a man whose
      movements seemed to you suspicious?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Indeed, we have,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, very boldly, his face eager with
      consciousness of the ability to oblige.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have?&rdquo; cried the sergeant, in a ringing voice. &ldquo;Where? When?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yesterday evening in the neighbourhood of Guignen...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, yes,&rdquo; the sergeant felt himself hot upon the trail.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There was a fellow who seemed very fearful of being recognized ... a man
      of fifty or thereabouts...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Fifty!&rdquo; cried the sergeant, and his face fell. &ldquo;Bah! This man of ours is
      no older than yourself, a thin wisp of a fellow of about your own height
      and of black hair, just like your own, by the description. Keep a lookout
      on your travels, master player. The King&rsquo;s Lieutenant in Rennes has sent
      us word this morning that he will pay ten louis to any one giving
      information that will lead to this scoundrel&rsquo;s arrest. So there&rsquo;s ten
      louis to be earned by keeping your eyes open, and sending word to the
      nearest justices. It would be a fine windfall for you, that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A fine windfall, indeed, captain,&rdquo; answered Andre-Louis, laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the sergeant had touched his horse with the spur, and was already
      trotting off in the wake of his men. Andre-Louis continued to laugh, quite
      silently, as he sometimes did when the humour of a jest was peculiarly
      keen.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he turned slowly about, and came back towards Pantaloon and the rest
      of the company, who were now all grouped together, at gaze.
    </p>
    <p>
      Pantaloon advanced to meet him with both hands out-held. For a moment
      Andre-Louis thought he was about to be embraced.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We hail you our saviour!&rdquo; the big man declaimed. &ldquo;Already the shadow of
      the gaol was creeping over us, chilling us to the very marrow. For though
      we be poor, yet are we all honest folk and not one of us has ever suffered
      the indignity of prison. Nor is there one of us would survive it. But for
      you, my friend, it might have happened. What magic did you work?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The magic that is to be worked in France with a King&rsquo;s portrait. The
      French are a very loyal nation, as you will have observed. They love their
      King&mdash;and his portrait even better than himself, especially when it
      is wrought in gold. But even in silver it is respected. The sergeant was
      so overcome by the sight of that noble visage&mdash;on a three-livre piece&mdash;that
      his anger vanished, and he has gone his ways leaving us to depart in
      peace.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, true! He said we must decamp. About it, my lads! Come, come...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But not until after breakfast,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;A half-hour for
      breakfast was conceded us by that loyal fellow, so deeply was he touched.
      True, he spoke of possible gardes-champetres. But he knows as well as I do
      that they are not seriously to be feared, and that if they came, again the
      King&rsquo;s portrait&mdash;wrought in copper this time&mdash;would produce the
      same melting effect upon them. So, my dear M. Pantaloon, break your fast
      at your ease. I can smell your cooking from here, and from the smell I
      argue that there is no need to wish you a good appetite.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My friend, my saviour!&rdquo; Pantaloon flung a great arm about the young man&rsquo;s
      shoulders. &ldquo;You shall stay to breakfast with us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I confess to a hope that you would ask me,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
