<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Republican</span></h2>
    <p>
      He was born with a gift of laughter and a sense that the world was mad.
      And that was all his patrimony. His very paternity was obscure, although
      the village of Gavrillac had long since dispelled the cloud of mystery
      that hung about it. Those simple Brittany folk were not so simple as to be
      deceived by a pretended relationship which did not even possess the virtue
      of originality. When a nobleman, for no apparent reason, announces himself
      the godfather of an infant fetched no man knew whence, and thereafter
      cares for the lad&rsquo;s rearing and education, the most unsophisticated of
      country folk perfectly understand the situation. And so the good people of
      Gavrillac permitted themselves no illusions on the score of the real
      relationship between Andre-Louis Moreau&mdash;as the lad had been named&mdash;and
      Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac, who dwelt in the big grey house
      that dominated from its eminence the village clustering below.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis had learnt his letters at the village school, lodged the while
      with old Rabouillet, the attorney, who in the capacity of fiscal
      intendant, looked after the affairs of M. de Kercadiou. Thereafter, at the
      age of fifteen, he had been packed off to Paris, to the Lycee of Louis Le
      Grand, to study the law which he was now returned to practise in
      conjunction with Rabouillet. All this at the charges of his godfather, M.
      de Kercadiou, who by placing him once more under the tutelage of
      Rabouillet would seem thereby quite clearly to be making provision for his
      future.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis, on his side, had made the most of his opportunities. You
      behold him at the age of four-and-twenty stuffed with learning enough to
      produce an intellectual indigestion in an ordinary mind. Out of his
      zestful study of Man, from Thucydides to the Encyclopaedists, from Seneca
      to Rousseau, he had confirmed into an unassailable conviction his earliest
      conscious impressions of the general insanity of his own species. Nor can
      I discover that anything in his eventful life ever afterwards caused him
      to waver in that opinion.
    </p>
    <p>
      In body he was a slight wisp of a fellow, scarcely above middle height,
      with a lean, astute countenance, prominent of nose and cheek-bones, and
      with lank, black hair that reached almost to his shoulders. His mouth was
      long, thin-lipped, and humorous. He was only just redeemed from ugliness
      by the splendour of a pair of ever-questing, luminous eyes, so dark as to
      be almost black. Of the whimsical quality of his mind and his rare gift of
      graceful expression, his writings&mdash;unfortunately but too scanty&mdash;and
      particularly his Confessions, afford us very ample evidence. Of his gift
      of oratory he was hardly conscious yet, although he had already achieved a
      certain fame for it in the Literary Chamber of Rennes&mdash;one of those
      clubs by now ubiquitous in the land, in which the intellectual youth of
      France foregathered to study and discuss the new philosophies that were
      permeating social life. But the fame he had acquired there was hardly
      enviable. He was too impish, too caustic, too much disposed&mdash;so
      thought his colleagues&mdash;to ridicule their sublime theories for the
      regeneration of mankind. Himself he protested that he merely held them up
      to the mirror of truth, and that it was not his fault if when reflected
      there they looked ridiculous.
    </p>
    <p>
      All that he achieved by this was to exasperate; and his expulsion from a
      society grown mistrustful of him must already have followed but for his
      friend, Philippe de Vilmorin, a divinity student of Rennes, who, himself,
      was one of the most popular members of the Literary Chamber.
    </p>
    <p>
      Coming to Gavrillac on a November morning, laden with news of the
      political storms which were then gathering over France, Philippe found in
      that sleepy Breton village matter to quicken his already lively
      indignation. A peasant of Gavrillac, named Mabey, had been shot dead that
      morning in the woods of Meupont, across the river, by a gamekeeper of the
      Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. The unfortunate fellow had been caught in the
      act of taking a pheasant from a snare, and the gamekeeper had acted under
      explicit orders from his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      Infuriated by an act of tyranny so absolute and merciless, M. de Vilmorin
      proposed to lay the matter before M. de Kercadiou. Mabey was a vassal of
      Gavrillac, and Vilmorin hoped to move the Lord of Gavrillac to demand at
      least some measure of reparation for the widow and the three orphans which
      that brutal deed had made.
    </p>
    <p>
      But because Andre-Louis was Philippe&rsquo;s dearest friend&mdash;indeed, his
      almost brother&mdash;the young seminarist sought him out in the first
      instance. He found him at breakfast alone in the long, low-ceilinged,
      white-panelled dining-room at Rabouillet&rsquo;s&mdash;the only home that
      Andre-Louis had ever known&mdash;and after embracing him, deafened him
      with his denunciation of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have heard of it already,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You speak as if the thing had not surprised you,&rdquo; his friend reproached
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing beastly can surprise me when done by a beast. And La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr
      is a beast, as all the world knows. The more fool Mabey for stealing his
      pheasants. He should have stolen somebody else&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is that all you have to say about it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What more is there to say? I&rsquo;ve a practical mind, I hope.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What more there is to say I propose to say to your godfather, M. de
      Kercadiou. I shall appeal to him for justice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Against M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr?&rdquo; Andre-Louis raised his eyebrows.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear ingenuous Philippe, dog doesn&rsquo;t eat dog.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are unjust to your godfather. He is a humane man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, as humane as you please. But this isn&rsquo;t a question of humanity. It&rsquo;s
      a question of game-laws.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin tossed his long arms to Heaven in disgust. He was a tall,
      slender young gentleman, a year or two younger than Andre-Louis. He was
      very soberly dressed in black, as became a seminarist, with white bands at
      wrists and throat and silver buckles to his shoes. His neatly clubbed
      brown hair was innocent of powder.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You talk like a lawyer,&rdquo; he exploded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Naturally. But don&rsquo;t waste anger on me on that account. Tell me what you
      want me to do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I want you to come to M. de Kercadiou with me, and to use your influence
      to obtain justice. I suppose I am asking too much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My dear Philippe, I exist to serve you. I warn you that it is a futile
      quest; but give me leave to finish my breakfast, and I am at your orders.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin dropped into a winged armchair by the well-swept hearth, on
      which a piled-up fire of pine logs was burning cheerily. And whilst he
      waited now he gave his friend the latest news of the events in Rennes.
      Young, ardent, enthusiastic, and inspired by Utopian ideals, he
      passionately denounced the rebellious attitude of the privileged.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis, already fully aware of the trend of feeling in the ranks of
      an order in whose deliberations he took part as the representative of a
      nobleman, was not at all surprised by what he heard. M. de Vilmorin found
      it exasperating that his friend should apparently decline to share his own
      indignation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Don&rsquo;t you see what it means?&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;The nobles, by disobeying the
      King, are striking at the very foundations of the throne. Don&rsquo;t they
      perceive that their very existence depends upon it; that if the throne
      falls over, it is they who stand nearest to it who will be crushed? Don&rsquo;t
      they see that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Evidently not. They are just governing classes, and I never heard of
      governing classes that had eyes for anything but their own profit.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is our grievance. That is what we are going to change.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are going to abolish governing classes? An interesting experiment. I
      believe it was the original plan of creation, and it might have succeeded
      but for Cain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What we are going to do,&rdquo; said M. de Vilmorin, curbing his exasperation,
      &ldquo;is to transfer the government to other hands.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you think that will make a difference?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I know it will.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! I take it that being now in minor orders, you already possess the
      confidence of the Almighty. He will have confided to you His intention of
      changing the pattern of mankind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin&rsquo;s fine ascetic face grew overcast. &ldquo;You are profane,
      Andre,&rdquo; he reproved his friend.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I assure you that I am quite serious. To do what you imply would require
      nothing short of divine intervention. You must change man, not systems.
      Can you and our vapouring friends of the Literary Chamber of Rennes, or
      any other learned society of France, devise a system of government that
      has never yet been tried? Surely not. And can they say of any system tried
      that it proved other than a failure in the end? My dear Philippe, the
      future is to be read with certainty only in the past. Ab actu ad posse
      valet consecutio. Man never changes. He is always greedy, always
      acquisitive, always vile. I am speaking of Man in the bulk.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you pretend that it is impossible to ameliorate the lot of the
      people?&rdquo; M. de Vilmorin challenged him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;When you say the people you mean, of course, the populace. Will you
      abolish it? That is the only way to ameliorate its lot, for as long as it
      remains populace its lot will be damnation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You argue, of course, for the side that employs you. That is natural, I
      suppose.&rdquo; M. de Vilmorin spoke between sorrow and indignation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;On the contrary, I seek to argue with absolute detachment. Let us test
      these ideas of yours. To what form of government do you aspire? A
      republic, it is to be inferred from what you have said. Well, you have it
      already. France in reality is a republic to-day.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Philippe stared at him. &ldquo;You are being paradoxical, I think. What of the
      King?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The King? All the world knows there has been no king in France since
      Louis XIV. There is an obese gentleman at Versailles who wears the crown,
      but the very news you bring shows for how little he really counts. It is
      the nobles and clergy who sit in the high places, with the people of
      France harnessed under their feet, who are the real rulers. That is why I
      say that France is a republic; she is a republic built on the best pattern&mdash;the
      Roman pattern. Then, as now, there were great patrician families in
      luxury, preserving for themselves power and wealth, and what else is
      accounted worth possessing; and there was the populace crushed and
      groaning, sweating, bleeding, starving, and perishing in the Roman
      kennels. That was a republic; the mightiest we have seen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Philippe strove with his impatience. &ldquo;At least you will admit&mdash;you
      have, in fact, admitted it&mdash;that we could not be worse governed than
      we are?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is not the point. The point is should we be better governed if we
      replaced the present ruling class by another? Without some guarantee of
      that I should be the last to lift a finger to effect a change. And what
      guarantees can you give? What is the class that aims at government? I will
      tell you. The bourgeoisie.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That startles you, eh? Truth is so often disconcerting. You hadn&rsquo;t
      thought of it? Well, think of it now. Look well into this Nantes
      manifesto. Who are the authors of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can tell you who it was constrained the municipality of Nantes to send
      it to the King. Some ten thousand workmen&mdash;shipwrights, weavers,
      labourers, and artisans of every kind.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stimulated to it, driven to it, by their employers, the wealthy traders
      and shipowners of that city,&rdquo; Andre-Louis replied. &ldquo;I have a habit of
      observing things at close quarters, which is why our colleagues of the
      Literary Chamber dislike me so cordially in debate. Where I delve they but
      skim. Behind those labourers and artisans of Nantes, counselling them,
      urging on these poor, stupid, ignorant toilers to shed their blood in
      pursuit of the will o&rsquo; the wisp of freedom, are the sail-makers, the
      spinners, the ship-owners and the slave-traders. The slave-traders! The
      men who live and grow rich by a traffic in human flesh and blood in the
      colonies, are conducting at home a campaign in the sacred name of liberty!
      Don&rsquo;t you see that the whole movement is a movement of hucksters and
      traders and peddling vassals swollen by wealth into envy of the power that
      lies in birth alone? The money-changers in Paris who hold the bonds in the
      national debt, seeing the parlous financial condition of the State,
      tremble at the thought that it may lie in the power of a single man to
      cancel the debt by bankruptcy. To secure themselves they are burrowing
      underground to overthrow a state and build upon its ruins a new one in
      which they shall be the masters. And to accomplish this they inflame the
      people. Already in Dauphiny we have seen blood run like water&mdash;the
      blood of the populace, always the blood of the populace. Now in Brittany
      we may see the like. And if in the end the new ideas prevail? if the
      seigneurial rule is overthrown, what then? You will have exchanged an
      aristocracy for a plutocracy. Is that worth while? Do you &lsquo;think that
      under money-changers and slave-traders and men who have waxed rich in
      other ways by the ignoble arts of buying and selling, the lot of the
      people will be any better than under their priests and nobles? Has it ever
      occurred to you, Philippe, what it is that makes the rule of the nobles so
      intolerable? Acquisitiveness. Acquisitiveness is the curse of mankind. And
      shall you expect less acquisitiveness in men who have built themselves up
      by acquisitiveness? Oh, I am ready to admit that the present government is
      execrable, unjust, tyrannical&mdash;what you will; but I beg you to look
      ahead, and to see that the government for which it is aimed at exchanging
      it may be infinitely worse.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Philippe sat thoughtful a moment. Then he returned to the attack.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You do not speak of the abuses, the horrible, intolerable abuses of power
      under which we labour at present.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where there is power there will always be the abuse of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not if the tenure of power is dependent upon its equitable
      administration.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The tenure of power is power. We cannot dictate to those who hold it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The people can&mdash;the people in its might.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Again I ask you, when you say the people do you mean the populace? You
      do. What power can the populace wield? It can run wild. It can burn and
      slay for a time. But enduring power it cannot wield, because power demands
      qualities which the populace does not possess, or it would not be
      populace. The inevitable, tragic corollary of civilization is populace.
      For the rest, abuses can be corrected by equity; and equity, if it is not
      found in the enlightened, is not to be found at all. M. Necker is to set
      about correcting abuses, and limiting privileges. That is decided. To that
      end the States General are to assemble.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And a promising beginning we have made in Brittany, as Heaven hears me!&rdquo;
       cried Philippe.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pooh! That is nothing. Naturally the nobles will not yield without a
      struggle. It is a futile and ridiculous struggle&mdash;but then... it is
      human nature, I suppose, to be futile and ridiculous.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin became witheringly sarcastic. &ldquo;Probably you will also
      qualify the shooting of Mabey as futile and ridiculous. I should even be
      prepared to hear you argue in defence of the Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr
      that his gamekeeper was merciful in shooting Mabey, since the alternative
      would have been a life-sentence to the galleys.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis drank the remainder of his chocolate; set down his cup, and
      pushed back his chair, his breakfast done.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I confess that I have not your big charity, my dear Philippe. I am
      touched by Mabey&rsquo;s fate. But, having conquered the shock of this news to
      my emotions, I do not forget that, after all, Mabey was thieving when he
      met his death.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin heaved himself up in his indignation.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is the point of view to be expected in one who is the assistant
      fiscal intendant of a nobleman, and the delegate of a nobleman to the
      States of Brittany.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Philippe, is that just? You are angry with me!&rdquo; he cried, in real
      solicitude.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am hurt,&rdquo; Vilmorin admitted. &ldquo;I am deeply hurt by your attitude. And I
      am not alone in resenting your reactionary tendencies. Do you know that
      the Literary Chamber is seriously considering your expulsion?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis shrugged. &ldquo;That neither surprises nor troubles me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin swept on, passionately: &ldquo;Sometimes I think that you have no
      heart. With you it is always the law, never equity. It occurs to me,
      Andre, that I was mistaken in coming to you. You are not likely to be of
      assistance to me in my interview with M. de Kercadiou.&rdquo; He took up his
      hat, clearly with the intention of departing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis sprang up and caught him by the arm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I vow,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;that this is the last time ever I shall consent to talk
      law or politics with you, Philippe. I love you too well to quarrel with
      you over other men&rsquo;s affairs.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I make them my own,&rdquo; Philippe insisted vehemently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course you do, and I love you for it. It is right that you should. You
      are to be a priest; and everybody&rsquo;s business is a priest&rsquo;s business.
      Whereas I am a lawyer&mdash;the fiscal intendant of a nobleman, as you say&mdash;and
      a lawyer&rsquo;s business is the business of his client. That is the difference
      between us. Nevertheless, you are not going to shake me off.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I tell you frankly, now that I come to think of it, that I should
      prefer you did not see M. de Kercadiou with me. Your duty to your client
      cannot be a help to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His wrath had passed; but his determination remained firm, based upon the
      reason he gave.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;It shall be as you please. But nothing
      shall prevent me at least from walking with you as far as the chateau, and
      waiting for you while you make your appeal to M. de Kercadiou.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And so they left the house good friends, for the sweetness of M. de
      Vilmorin&rsquo;s nature did not admit of rancour, and together they took their
      way up the steep main street of Gavrillac.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
