<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Lord of Gavrillac</span></h2>
    <p>
      For the second time that day Andre-Louis set out for the chateau, walking
      briskly, and heeding not at all the curious eyes that followed him through
      the village, and the whisperings that marked his passage through the
      people, all agog by now with that day&rsquo;s event in which he had been an
      actor.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was ushered by Benoit, the elderly body-servant, rather grandiloquently
      called the seneschal, into the ground-floor room known traditionally as
      the library. It still contained several shelves of neglected volumes, from
      which it derived its title, but implements of the chase&mdash;fowling-pieces,
      powder-horns, hunting-bags, sheath-knives&mdash;obtruded far more
      prominently than those of study. The furniture was massive, of oak richly
      carved, and belonging to another age. Great massive oak beams crossed the
      rather lofty whitewashed ceiling.
    </p>
    <p>
      Here the squat Seigneur de Gavrillac was restlessly pacing when
      Andre-Louis was introduced. He was already informed, as he announced at
      once, of what had taken place at the Breton arme. M. de Chabrillane had
      just left him, and he confessed himself deeply grieved and deeply
      perplexed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The pity of it!&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;The pity of it!&rdquo; He bowed his enormous head.
      &ldquo;So estimable a young man, and so full of promise. Ah, this La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr
      is a hard man, and he feels very strongly in these matters. He may be
      right. I don&rsquo;t know. I have never killed a man for holding different views
      from mine. In fact, I have never killed a man at all. It isn&rsquo;t in my
      nature. I shouldn&rsquo;t sleep of nights if I did. But men are differently
      made.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The question, monsieur my godfather,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, &ldquo;is what is to be
      done.&rdquo; He was quite calm and self-possessed, but very white.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. de Kercadiou stared at him blankly out of his pale eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, what the devil is there to do? From what I am told, Vilmorin went so
      far as to strike M. le Marquis.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Under the very grossest provocation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Which he himself provoked by his revolutionary language. The poor lad&rsquo;s
      head was full of this encyclopaedist trash. It comes of too much reading.
      I have never set much store by books, Andre; and I have never known
      anything but trouble to come out of learning. It unsettles a man. It
      complicates his views of life, destroys the simplicity which makes for
      peace of mind and happiness. Let this miserable affair be a warning to
      you, Andre. You are, yourself, too prone to these new-fashioned
      speculations upon a different constitution of the social order. You see
      what comes of it. A fine, estimable young man, the only prop of his
      widowed mother too, forgets himself, his position, his duty to that mother&mdash;everything;
      and goes and gets himself killed like this. It is infernally sad. On my
      soul it is sad.&rdquo; He produced a handkerchief, and blew his nose with
      vehemence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis felt a tightening of his heart, a lessening of the hopes,
      never too sanguine, which he had founded upon his godfather.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your criticisms,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;are all for the conduct of the dead, and none
      for that of the murderer. It does not seem possible that you should be in
      sympathy with such a crime.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Crime?&rdquo; shrilled M. de Kercadiou. &ldquo;My God, boy, you are speaking of M. de
      La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am, and of the abominable murder he has committed...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Stop!&rdquo; M. de Kercadiou was very emphatic. &ldquo;I cannot permit that you apply
      such terms to him. I cannot permit it. M. le Marquis is my friend, and is
      likely very soon to stand in a still closer relationship.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Notwithstanding this?&rdquo; asked Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. de Kercadiou was frankly impatient.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, what has this to do with it? I may deplore it. But I have no right
      to condemn it. It is a common way of adjusting differences between
      gentlemen.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You really believe that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What the devil do you imply, Andre? Should I say a thing that I don&rsquo;t
      believe? You begin to make me angry.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;&lsquo;Thou shalt not kill,&rsquo; is the King&rsquo;s law as well as God&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are determined to quarrel with me, I think. It was a duel...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis interrupted him. &ldquo;It is no more a duel than if it had been
      fought with pistols of which only M. le Marquis&rsquo;s was loaded. He invited
      Philippe to discuss the matter further, with the deliberate intent of
      forcing a quarrel upon him and killing him. Be patient with me, monsieur
      my god-father. I am not telling you of what I imagine but what M. le
      Marquis himself admitted to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Dominated a little by the young man&rsquo;s earnestness, M. de Kercadiou&rsquo;s pale
      eyes fell away. He turned with a shrug, and sauntered over to the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It would need a court of honour to decide such an issue. And we have no
      courts of honour,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But we have courts of justice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With returning testiness the seigneur swung round to face him again. &ldquo;And
      what court of justice, do you think, would listen to such a plea as you
      appear to have in mind?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is the court of the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant at Rennes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And do you think the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant would listen to you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not to me, perhaps, Monsieur. But if you were to bring the plaint...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I bring the plaint?&rdquo; M. de Kercadiou&rsquo;s pale eyes were wide with horror of
      the suggestion.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The thing happened here on your domain.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I bring a plaint against M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr! You are out of your
      senses, I think. Oh, you are mad; as mad as that poor friend of yours who
      has come to this end through meddling in what did not concern him. The
      language he used here to M. le Marquis on the score of Mabey was of the
      most offensive. Perhaps you didn&rsquo;t know that. It does not at all surprise
      me that the Marquis should have desired satisfaction.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, on a note of hopelessness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You see? What the devil do you see?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That I shall have to depend upon myself alone.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what the devil do you propose to do, if you please?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I shall go to Rennes, and lay the facts before the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He&rsquo;ll be too busy to see you.&rdquo; And M. de Kercadiou&rsquo;s mind swung a trifle
      inconsequently, as weak minds will. &ldquo;There is trouble enough in Rennes
      already on the score of these crazy States General, with which the
      wonderful M. Necker is to repair the finances of the kingdom. As if a
      peddling Swiss bank-clerk, who is also a damned Protestant, could succeed
      where such men as Calonne and Brienne have failed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-afternoon, monsieur my godfather,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where are you going?&rdquo; was the querulous demand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Home at present. To Rennes in the morning.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait, boy, wait!&rdquo; The squat little man rolled forward, affectionate
      concern on his great ugly face, and he set one of his podgy hands on his
      godson&rsquo;s shoulder. &ldquo;Now listen to me, Andre,&rdquo; he reasoned. &ldquo;This is sheer
      knight-errantry&mdash;moonshine, lunacy. You&rsquo;ll come to no good by it if
      you persist. You&rsquo;ve read &lsquo;Don Quixote,&rsquo; and what happened to him when he
      went tilting against windmills. It&rsquo;s what will happen to you, neither more
      nor less. Leave things as they are, my boy. I wouldn&rsquo;t have a mischief
      happen to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis looked at him, smiling wanly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I swore an oath to-day which it would damn my soul to break.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You mean that you&rsquo;ll go in spite of anything that I may say?&rdquo; Impetuous
      as he was inconsequent, M. de Kercadiou was bristling again. &ldquo;Very well,
      then, go... Go to the devil!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will begin with the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And if you get into the trouble you are seeking, don&rsquo;t come whimpering to
      me for assistance,&rdquo; the seigneur stormed. He was very angry now. &ldquo;Since
      you choose to disobey me, you can break your empty head against the
      windmill, and be damned to you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis bowed with a touch of irony, and reached the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If the windmill should prove too formidable,&rdquo; said he, from the
      threshold, &ldquo;I may see what can be done with the wind. Good-bye, monsieur
      my godfather.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was gone, and M. de Kercadiou was alone, purple in the face, puzzling
      out that last cryptic utterance, and not at all happy in his mind, either
      on the score of his godson or of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. He was disposed to
      be angry with them both. He found these headstrong, wilful men who
      relentlessly followed their own impulses very disturbing and irritating.
      Himself he loved his ease, and to be at peace with his neighbours; and
      that seemed to him so obviously the supreme good of life that he was
      disposed to brand them as fools who troubled to seek other things.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
