<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span><span epub:type="subtitle">President Le Chapelier</span></h2>
    <p>
      The ferment of Paris which, during the two following days, resembled an
      armed camp rather than a city, delayed the burial of Bertrand des Amis
      until the Wednesday of that eventful week. Amid events that were shaking a
      nation to its foundations the death of a fencing-master passed almost
      unnoticed even among his pupils, most of whom did not come to the academy
      during the two days that his body lay there. Some few, however, did come,
      and these conveyed the news to others, with the result that the master was
      followed to Pere Lachaise by a score of young men at the head of whom as
      chief mourner walked Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      There were no relatives to be advised so far as Andre-Louis was aware,
      although within a week of M. des Amis&rsquo; death a sister turned up from Passy
      to claim his heritage. This was considerable, for the master had prospered
      and saved money, most of which was invested in the Compagnie des Eaux and
      the National Debt. Andre-Louis consigned her to the lawyers, and saw her
      no more.
    </p>
    <p>
      The death of des Amis left him with so profound a sense of loneliness and
      desolation that he had no thought or care for the sudden access of fortune
      which it automatically procured him. To the master&rsquo;s sister might fall
      such wealth as he had amassed, but Andre-Louis succeeded to the mine
      itself from which that wealth had been extracted, the fencing-school in
      which by now he was himself so well established as an instructor that its
      numerous pupils looked to him to carry it forward successfully as its
      chief. And never was there a season in which fencing-academies knew such
      prosperity as in these troubled days, when every man was sharpening his
      sword and schooling himself in the uses of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was not until a couple of weeks later that Andre-Louis realized what
      had really happened to him, and he found himself at the same time an
      exhausted man, for during that fortnight he had been doing the work of
      two. If he had not hit upon the happy expedient of pairing-off his more
      advanced pupils to fence with each other, himself standing by to
      criticize, correct and otherwise instruct, he must have found the task
      utterly beyond his strength. Even so, it was necessary for him to fence
      some six hours daily, and every day he brought arrears of lassitude from
      yesterday until he was in danger of succumbing under the increasing burden
      of fatigue. In the end he took an assistant to deal with beginners, who
      gave the hardest work. He found him readily enough by good fortune in one
      of his own pupils named Le Duc. As the summer advanced, and the concourse
      of pupils steadily increased, it became necessary for him to take yet
      another assistant&mdash;an able young instructor named Galoche&mdash;and
      another room on the floor above.
    </p>
    <p>
      They were strenuous days for Andre-Louis, more strenuous than he had ever
      known, even when he had been at work to build up the Binet Company; but it
      follows that they were days of extraordinary prosperity. He comments
      regretfully upon the fact that Bertrand des Amis should have died by
      ill-chance on the very eve of so profitable a vogue of sword-play.
    </p>
    <p>
      The arms of the Academie du Roi, to which Andre-Louis had no title, still
      continued to be displayed outside his door. He had overcome the difficulty
      in a manner worthy of Scaramouche. He left the escutcheon and the legend
      &ldquo;Academie de Bertrand des Amis, Maitre en fait d&rsquo;Armes des Academies du
      Roi,&rdquo; appending to it the further legend: &ldquo;Conducted by Andre-Louis.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      With little time now in which to go abroad it was from his pupils and the
      newspapers&mdash;of which a flood had risen in Paris with the
      establishment of the freedom of the Press&mdash;that he learnt of the
      revolutionary processes around him, following upon, as a measure of
      anticlimax, the fall of the Bastille. That had happened whilst M. des Amis
      lay dead, on the day before they buried him, and was indeed the chief
      reason of the delay in his burial. It was an event that had its
      inspiration in that ill-considered charge of Prince Lambesc in which the
      fencing-master had been killed.
    </p>
    <p>
      The outraged people had besieged the electors in the Hotel de Ville,
      demanding arms with which to defend their lives from these foreign
      murderers hired by despotism. And in the end the electors had consented to
      give them arms, or, rather&mdash;for arms it had none to give&mdash;to
      permit them to arm themselves. Also it had given them a cockade, of red
      and blue, the colours of Paris. Because these colours were also those of
      the liveries of the Duke of Orleans, white was added to them&mdash;the
      white of the ancient standard of France&mdash;and thus was the tricolour
      born. Further, a permanent committee of electors was appointed to watch
      over public order.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus empowered the people went to work with such good effect that within
      thirty-six hours sixty thousand pikes had been forged. At nine o&rsquo;clock on
      Tuesday morning thirty thousand men were before the Invalides. By eleven
      o&rsquo;clock they had ravished it of its store of arms amounting to some thirty
      thousand muskets, whilst others had seized the Arsenal and possessed
      themselves of powder.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus they prepared to resist the attack that from seven points was to be
      launched that evening upon the city. But Paris did not wait for the
      attack. It took the initiative. Mad with enthusiasm it conceived the
      insane project of taking that terrible menacing fortress, the Bastille,
      and, what is more, it succeeded, as you know, before five o&rsquo;clock that
      night, aided in the enterprise by the French Guards with cannon.
    </p>
    <p>
      The news of it, borne to Versailles by Lambesc in flight with his dragoons
      before the vast armed force that had sprouted from the paving-stones of
      Paris, gave the Court pause. The people were in possession of the guns
      captured from the Bastille. They were erecting barricades in the streets,
      and mounting these guns upon them. The attack had been too long delayed.
      It must be abandoned since now it could lead only to fruitless slaughter
      that must further shake the already sorely shaken prestige of Royalty.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so the Court, growing momentarily wise again under the spur of fear,
      preferred to temporize. Necker should be brought back yet once again, the
      three orders should sit united as the National Assembly demanded. It was
      the completest surrender of force to force, the only argument. The King
      went alone to inform the National Assembly of that eleventh-hour resolve,
      to the great comfort of its members, who viewed with pain and alarm the
      dreadful state of things in Paris. &ldquo;No force but the force of reason and
      argument&rdquo; was their watchword, and it was so to continue for two years
      yet, with a patience and fortitude in the face of ceaseless provocation to
      which insufficient justice has been done.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the King was leaving the Assembly, a woman, embracing his knees, gave
      tongue to what might well be the question of all France:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, sire, are you really sincere? Are you sure they will not make you
      change your mind?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Yet no such question was asked when a couple of days later the King, alone
      and unguarded save by the representatives of the Nation, came to Paris to
      complete the peacemaking, the surrender of Privilege. The Court was filled
      with terror by the adventure. Were they not the &ldquo;enemy,&rdquo; these mutinous
      Parisians? And should a King go thus among his enemies? If he shared some
      of that fear, as the gloom of him might lead us to suppose, he must have
      found it idle. What if two hundred thousand men under arms&mdash;men
      without uniforms and with the most extraordinary motley of weapons ever
      seen&mdash;awaited him? They awaited him as a guard of honour.
    </p>
    <p>
      Mayor Bailly at the barrier presented him with the keys of the city.
      &ldquo;These are the same keys that were presented to Henri IV. He had
      reconquered his people. Now the people have reconquered their King.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At the Hotel de Ville Mayor Bailly offered him the new cockade, the
      tricoloured symbol of constitutional France, and when he had given his
      royal confirmation to the formation of the Garde Bourgeoise and to the
      appointments of Bailly and Lafayette, he departed again for Versailles
      amid the shouts of &ldquo;Vive le Roi!&rdquo; from his loyal people.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now you see Privilege&mdash;before the cannon&rsquo;s mouth, as it were&mdash;submitting
      at last, where had they submitted sooner they might have saved oceans of
      blood&mdash;chiefly their own. They come, nobles and clergy, to join the
      National Assembly, to labour with it upon this constitution that is to
      regenerate France. But the reunion is a mockery&mdash;as much a mockery as
      that of the Archbishop of Paris singing the Te Deum for the fall of the
      Bastille&mdash;most grotesque and incredible of all these grotesque and
      incredible events. All that has happened to the National Assembly is that
      it has introduced five or six hundred enemies to hamper and hinder its
      deliberations.
    </p>
    <p>
      But all this is an oft-told tale, to be read in detail elsewhere. I give
      you here just so much of it as I have found in Andre-Louis&rsquo; own writings,
      almost in his own words, reflecting the changes that were operated in his
      mind. Silent now, he came fully to believe in those things in which he had
      not believed when earlier he had preached them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile together with the change in his fortune had come a change in his
      position towards the law, a change brought about by the other changes
      wrought around him. No longer need he hide himself. Who in these days
      would prefer against him the grotesque charge of sedition for what he had
      done in Brittany? What court would dare to send him to the gallows for
      having said in advance what all France was saying now? As for that other
      possible charge of murder, who should concern himself with the death of
      the miserable Binet killed by him&mdash;if, indeed, he had killed him, as
      he hoped&mdash;in self-defence.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so one fine day in early August, Andre-Louis gave himself a holiday
      from the academy, which was now working smoothly under his assistants,
      hired a chaise and drove out to Versailles to the Café d&rsquo;Amaury, which he
      knew for the meeting-place of the Club Breton, the seed from which was to
      spring that Society of the Friends of the Constitution better known as the
      Jacobins. He went to seek Le Chapelier, who had been one of the founders
      of the club, a man of great prominence now, president of the Assembly in
      this important season when it was deliberating upon the Declaration of the
      Rights of Man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier&rsquo;s importance was reflected in the sudden servility of the
      shirt-sleeved, white-aproned waiter of whom Andre-Louis inquired for the
      representative.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. Le Chapelier was above-stairs with friends. The waiter desired to serve
      the gentleman, but hesitated to break in upon the assembly in which M. le
      Depute found himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis gave him a piece of silver to encourage him to make the
      attempt. Then he sat down at a marble-topped table by the window looking
      out over the wide tree-encircled square. There, in that common-room of the
      café, deserted at this hour of mid-afternoon, the great man came to him.
      Less than a year ago he had yielded precedence to Andre-Louis in a matter
      of delicate leadership; to-day he stood on the heights, one of the great
      leaders of the Nation in travail, and Andre-Louis was deep down in the
      shadows of the general mass.
    </p>
    <p>
      The thought was in the minds of both as they scanned each other, each
      noting in the other the marked change that a few months had wrought. In Le
      Chapelier, Andre-Louis observed certain heightened refinements of dress
      that went with certain subtler refinements of countenance. He was thinner
      than of old, his face was pale and there was a weariness in the eyes that
      considered his visitor through a gold-rimmed spy-glass. In Andre-Louis
      those jaded but quick-moving eyes of the Breton deputy noted changes even
      more marked. The almost constant swordmanship of these last months had
      given Andre-Louis a grace of movement, a poise, and a curious, indefinable
      air of dignity, of command. He seemed taller by virtue of this, and he was
      dressed with an elegance which if quiet was none the less rich. He wore a
      small silver-hilted sword, and wore it as if used to it, and his black
      hair that Le Chapelier had never seen other than fluttering lank about his
      bony cheeks was glossy now and gathered into a club. Almost he had the air
      of a petit-maitre.
    </p>
    <p>
      In both, however, the changes were purely superficial, as each was soon to
      reveal to the other. Le Chapelier was ever the same direct and downright
      Breton, abrupt of manner and of speech. He stood smiling a moment in
      mingled surprise and pleasure; then opened wide his arms. They embraced
      under the awe-stricken gaze of the waiter, who at once effaced himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Andre-Louis, my friend! Whence do you drop?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We drop from above. I come from below to survey at close quarters one who
      is on the heights.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;On the heights! But that you willed it so, it is yourself might now be
      standing in my place.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have a poor head for heights, and I find the atmosphere too rarefied.
      Indeed, you look none too well on it yourself, Isaac. You are pale.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Assembly was in session all last night. That is all. These damned
      Privileged multiply our difficulties. They will do so until we decree
      their abolition.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They sat down. &ldquo;Abolition! You contemplate so much? Not that you surprise
      me. You have always been an extremist.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I contemplate it that I may save them. I seek to abolish them officially,
      so as to save them from abolition of another kind at the hands of a people
      they exasperate.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see. And the King?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The King is the incarnation of the Nation. We shall deliver him together
      with the Nation from the bondage of Privilege. Our constitution will
      accomplish it. You agree?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis shrugged. &ldquo;Does it matter? I am a dreamer in politics, not a
      man of action. Until lately I have been very moderate; more moderate than
      you think. But now almost I am a republican. I have been watching, and I
      have perceived that this King is&mdash;just nothing, a puppet who dances
      according to the hand that pulls the string.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This King, you say? What other king is possible? You are surely not of
      those who weave dreams about Orleans? He has a sort of party, a following
      largely recruited by the popular hatred of the Queen and the known fact
      that she hates him. There are some who have thought of making him regent,
      some even more; Robespierre is of the number.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who?&rdquo; asked Andre-Louis, to whom the name was unknown.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Robespierre&mdash;a preposterous little lawyer who represents Arras, a
      shabby, clumsy, timid dullard, who will make speeches through his nose to
      which nobody listens&mdash;an ultra-royalist whom the royalists and the
      Orleanists are using for their own ends. He has pertinacity, and he
      insists upon being heard. He may be listened to some day. But that he, or
      the others, will ever make anything of Orleans... pish! Orleans himself
      may desire it, but the man is a eunuch in crime; he would, but he can&rsquo;t.
      The phrase is Mirabeau&rsquo;s.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He broke off to demand Andre-Louis&rsquo; news of himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You did not treat me as a friend when you wrote to me,&rdquo; he complained.
      &ldquo;You gave me no clue to your whereabouts; you represented yourself as on
      the verge of destitution and withheld from me the means to come to your
      assistance. I have been troubled in mind about you, Andre. Yet to judge by
      your appearance I might have spared myself that. You seem prosperous,
      assured. Tell me of it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis told him frankly all that there was to tell. &ldquo;Do you know that
      you are an amazement to me?&rdquo; said the deputy. &ldquo;From the robe to the
      buskin, and now from the buskin to the sword! What will be the end of you,
      I wonder?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The gallows, probably.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Pish! Be serious. Why not the toga of the senator in senatorial France?
      It might be yours now if you had willed it so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The surest way to the gallows of all,&rdquo; laughed Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the moment Le Chapelier manifested impatience. I wonder did the phrase
      cross his mind that day four years later when himself he rode in the
      death-cart to the Greve.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We are sixty-six Breton deputies in the Assembly. Should a vacancy occur,
      will you act as suppleant? A word from me together with the influence of
      your name in Rennes and Nantes, and the thing is done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis laughed outright. &ldquo;Do you know, Isaac, that I never meet you
      but you seek to thrust me into politics?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you have a gift for politics. You were born for politics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, yes&mdash;Scaramouche in real life. I&rsquo;ve played it on the stage. Let
      that suffice. Tell me, Isaac, what news of my old friend, La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is here in Versailles, damn him&mdash;a thorn in the flesh of the
      Assembly. They&rsquo;ve burnt his chateau at La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. Unfortunately he
      wasn&rsquo;t in it at the time. The flames haven&rsquo;t even singed his insolence. He
      dreams that when this philosophic aberration is at an end, there will be
      serfs to rebuild it for him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So there has been trouble in Brittany?&rdquo; Andre-Louis had become suddenly
      grave, his thoughts swinging to Gavrillac.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;An abundance of it, and elsewhere too. Can you wonder? These delays at
      such a time, with famine in the land? Chateaux have been going up in smoke
      during the last fortnight. The peasants took their cue from the Parisians,
      and treated every castle as a Bastille. Order is being restored, there as
      here, and they are quieter now.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What of Gavrillac? Do you know?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I believe all to be well. M. de Kercadiou was not a Marquis de La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr. He was in sympathy with his people. It is not likely that they
      would injure Gavrillac. But don&rsquo;t you correspond with your godfather?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the circumstances&mdash;no. What you tell me would make it now more
      difficult than ever, for he must account me one of those who helped to
      light the torch that has set fire to so much belonging to his class.
      Ascertain for me that all is well, and let me know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will, at once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At parting, when Andre-Louis was on the point of stepping into his
      cabriolet to return to Paris, he sought information on another matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you happen to know if M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr has married?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t; which really means that he hasn&rsquo;t. One would have heard of it in
      the case of that exalted Privileged.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To be sure.&rdquo; Andre-Louis spoke indifferently. &ldquo;Au revoir, Isaac! You&rsquo;ll
      come and see me&mdash;13 Rue du Hasard. Come soon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As soon and as often as my duties will allow. They keep me chained here
      at present.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Poor slave of duty with your gospel of liberty!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;True! And because of that I will come. I have a duty to Brittany: to make
      Omnes Omnibus one of her representatives in the National Assembly.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is a duty you will oblige me by neglecting,&rdquo; laughed Andre-Louis,
      and drove away.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
