<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span><span epub:type="subtitle">At Meudon</span></h2>
    <p>
      Later in the week he received a visit from Le Chapelier just before noon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have news for you, Andre. Your godfather is at Meudon. He arrived there
      two days ago. Had you heard?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But no. How should I hear? Why is he at Meudon?&rdquo; He was conscious of a
      faint excitement, which he could hardly have explained.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know. There have been fresh disturbances in Brittany. It may be
      due to that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so he has come for shelter to his brother?&rdquo; asked Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To his brother&rsquo;s house, yes; but not to his brother. Where do you live at
      all, Andre? Do you never hear any of the news? Etienne de Gavrillac
      emigrated years ago. He was of the household of M. d&rsquo;Artois, and he
      crossed the frontier with him. By now, no doubt, he is in Germany with
      him, conspiring against France. For that is what the emigres are doing.
      That Austrian woman at the Tuileries will end by destroying the monarchy.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, yes,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis impatiently. Politics interested him not at
      all this morning. &ldquo;But about Gavrillac?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, haven&rsquo;t I told you that Gavrillac is at Meudon, installed in the
      house his brother has left? Dieu de Dieu! Don&rsquo;t I speak French or don&rsquo;t
      you understand the language? I believe that Rabouillet, his intendant, is
      in charge of Gavrillac. I have brought you the news the moment I received
      it. I thought you would probably wish to go out to Meudon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course. I will go at once&mdash;that is, as soon as I can. I can&rsquo;t
      to-day, nor yet to-morrow. I am too busy here.&rdquo; He waved a hand towards
      the inner room, whence proceeded the click-click of blades, the quick
      moving of feet, and the voice of the instructor, Le Duc.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, well, that is your own affair. You are busy. I leave you now. Let
      us dine this evening at the Café de Foy. Kersain will be of the party.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A moment!&rdquo; Andre-Louis&rsquo; voice arrested him on the threshold. &ldquo;Is Mlle. de
      Kercadiou with her uncle?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How the devil should I know? Go and find out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He was gone, and Andre-Louis stood there a moment deep in thought. Then he
      turned and went back to resume with his pupil, the Vicomte de Villeniort,
      the interrupted exposition of the demi-contre of Danet, illustrating with
      a small-sword the advantages to be derived from its adoption.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thereafter he fenced with the Vicomte, who was perhaps the ablest of his
      pupils at the time, and all the while his thoughts were on the heights of
      Meudon, his mind casting up the lessons he had to give that afternoon and
      on the morrow, and wondering which of these he might postpone without
      deranging the academy. When having touched the Vicomte three times in
      succession, he paused and wrenched himself back to the present, it was to
      marvel at the precision to be gained by purely mechanical action. Without
      bestowing a thought upon what he was doing, his wrist and arm and knees
      had automatically performed their work, like the accurate fighting engine
      into which constant practice for a year and more had combined them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not until Sunday was Andre-Louis able to satisfy a wish which the
      impatience of the intervening days had converted into a yearning. Dressed
      with more than ordinary care, his head elegantly coiffed&mdash;by one of
      those hairdressers to the nobility of whom so many were being thrown out
      of employment by the stream of emigration which was now flowing freely&mdash;Andre-Louis
      mounted his hired carriage, and drove out to Meudon.
    </p>
    <p>
      The house of the younger Kercadiou no more resembled that of the head of
      the family than did his person. A man of the Court, where his brother was
      essentially a man of the soil, an officer of the household of M. le Comte
      d&rsquo;Artois, he had built for himself and his family an imposing villa on the
      heights of Meudon in a miniature park, conveniently situated for him
      midway between Versailles and Paris, and easily accessible from either. M.
      d&rsquo;Artois&mdash;the royal tennis-player&mdash;had been amongst the very
      first to emigrate. Together with the Condes, the Contis, the Polignacs,
      and others of the Queen&rsquo;s intimate council, old Marshal de Broglie and the
      Prince de Lambesc, who realized that their very names had become odious to
      the people, he had quitted France immediately after the fall of the
      Bastille. He had gone to play tennis beyond the frontier&mdash;and there
      consummate the work of ruining the French monarchy upon which he and those
      others had been engaged in France. With him, amongst several members of
      his household went Etienne de Kercadiou, and with Etienne de Kercadiou
      went his family, a wife and four children. Thus it was that the Seigneur
      de Gavrillac, glad to escape from a province so peculiarly disturbed as
      that of Brittany&mdash;where the nobles had shown themselves the most
      intransigent of all France&mdash;had come to occupy in his brother&rsquo;s
      absence the courtier&rsquo;s handsome villa at Meudon.
    </p>
    <p>
      That he was quite happy there is not to be supposed. A man of his almost
      Spartan habits, accustomed to plain fare and self-help, was a little
      uneasy in this sybaritic abode, with its soft carpets, profusion of
      gilding, and battalion of sleek, silent-footed servants&mdash;for
      Kercadiou the younger had left his entire household behind. Time, which at
      Gavrillac he had kept so fully employed in agrarian concerns, here hung
      heavily upon his hands. In self-defence he slept a great deal, and but for
      Aline, who made no attempt to conceal her delight at this proximity to
      Paris and the heart of things, it is possible that he would have beat a
      retreat almost at once from surroundings that sorted so ill with his
      habits. Later on, perhaps, he would accustom himself and grow resigned to
      this luxurious inactivity. In the meantime the novelty of it fretted him,
      and it was into the presence of a peevish and rather somnolent M. de
      Kercadiou that Andre-Louis was ushered in the early hours of the afternoon
      of that Sunday in June. He was unannounced, as had ever been the custom at
      Gavrillac. This because Benoit, M. de Kercadiou&rsquo;s old seneschal, had
      accompanied his seigneur upon this soft adventure, and was installed&mdash;to
      the ceaseless and but half-concealed hilarity of the impertinent
      valetaille that M. Etienne had left&mdash;as his maitre d&rsquo;hotel here at
      Meudon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Benoit had welcomed M. Andre with incoherencies of delight; almost had he
      gambolled about him like some faithful dog, whilst conducting him to the
      salon and the presence of the Lord of Gavrillac, who would&mdash;in the
      words of Benoit&mdash;be ravished to see M. Andre again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monseigneur! Monseigneur!&rdquo; he cried in a quavering voice, entering a pace
      or two in advance of the visitor. &ldquo;It is M. Andre... M. Andre, your
      godson, who comes to kiss your hand. He is here... and so fine that you
      would hardly know him. Here he is, monseigneur! Is he not beautiful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And the old servant rubbed his hands in conviction of the delight that he
      believed he was conveying to his master.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis crossed the threshold of that great room, soft-carpeted to the
      foot, dazzling to the eye. It was immensely lofty, and its festooned
      ceiling was carried on fluted pillars with gilded capitals. The door by
      which he entered, and the windows that opened upon the garden, were of an
      enormous height&mdash;almost, indeed, the full height of the room itself.
      It was a room overwhelmingly gilded, with an abundance of ormolu
      encrustations on the furniture, in which it nowise differed from what was
      customary in the dwellings of people of birth and wealth. Never, indeed,
      was there a time in which so much gold was employed decoratively as in
      this age when coined gold was almost unprocurable, and paper money had
      been put into circulation to supply the lack. It was a saying of
      Andre-Louis&rsquo; that if these people could only have been induced to put the
      paper on their walls and the gold into their pockets, the finances of the
      kingdom might soon have been in better case.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Seigneur&mdash;furbished and beruffled to harmonize with his
      surroundings&mdash;had risen, startled by this exuberant invasion on the
      part of Benoit, who had been almost as forlorn as himself since their
      coming to Meudon.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is it? Eh?&rdquo; His pale, short-sighted eyes peered at the visitor.
      &ldquo;Andre!&rdquo; said he, between surprise and sternness; and the colour deepened
      in his great pink face.
    </p>
    <p>
      Benoit, with his back to his master, deliberately winked and grinned at
      Andre-Louis to encourage him not to be put off by any apparent hostility
      on the part of his godfather. That done, the intelligent old fellow
      discreetly effaced himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you want here?&rdquo; growled M. de Kercadiou.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No more than to kiss your hand, as Benoit has told you, monsieur my
      godfather,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis submissively, bowing his sleek black head.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have contrived without kissing it for two years.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do not, monsieur, reproach me with my misfortune.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The little man stood very stiffly erect, his disproportionately large head
      thrown back, his pale prominent eyes very stern.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Did you think to make your outrageous offence any better by vanishing in
      that heartless manner, by leaving us without knowledge of whether you were
      alive or dead?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At first it was dangerous&mdash;dangerous to my life&mdash;to disclose my
      whereabouts. Then for a time I was in need, almost destitute, and my pride
      forbade me, after what I had done and the view you must take of it, to
      appeal to you for help. Later...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Destitute?&rdquo; The Seigneur interrupted. For a moment his lip trembled. Then
      he steadied himself, and the frown deepened as he surveyed this very
      changed and elegant godson of his, noted the quiet richness of his
      apparel, the paste buckles and red heels to his shoes, the sword hilted in
      mother-o&rsquo;-pearl and silver, and the carefully dressed hair that he had
      always seen hanging in wisps about his face. &ldquo;At least you do not look
      destitute now,&rdquo; he sneered.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am not. I have prospered since. In that, monsieur, I differ from the
      ordinary prodigal, who returns only when he needs assistance. I return
      solely because I love you, monsieur&mdash;to tell you so. I have come at
      the very first moment after hearing of your presence here.&rdquo; He advanced.
      &ldquo;Monsieur my godfather!&rdquo; he said, and held out his hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      But M. de Kercadiou remained unbending, wrapped in his cold dignity and
      resentment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Whatever tribulations you may have suffered or consider that you may have
      suffered, they are far less than your disgraceful conduct deserved, and I
      observe that they have nothing abated your impudence. You think that you
      have but to come here and say, &lsquo;Monsieur my godfather!&rsquo; and everything is
      to be forgiven and forgotten. That is your error. You have committed too
      great a wrong; you have offended against everything by which I hold, and
      against myself personally, by your betrayal of my trust in you. You are
      one of those unspeakable scoundrels who are responsible for this
      revolution.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Alas, monsieur, I see that you share the common delusion. These
      unspeakable scoundrels but demanded a constitution, as was promised them
      from the throne. They were not to know that the promise was insincere, or
      that its fulfilment would be baulked by the privileged orders. The men who
      have precipitated this revolution, monsieur, are the nobles and the
      prelates.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You dare&mdash;and at such a time as this&mdash;stand there and tell me
      such abominable lies! You dare to say that the nobles have made the
      revolution, when scores of them, following the example of M. le Duc
      d&rsquo;Aiguillon, have flung their privileges, even their title-deeds, into the
      lap of the people! Or perhaps you deny it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, no. Having wantonly set fire to their house, they now try to put it
      out by throwing water on it; and where they fail they put the entire blame
      on the flames.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see that you have come here to talk politics.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Far from it. I have come, if possible, to explain myself. To understand
      is always to forgive. That is a great saying of Montaigne&rsquo;s. If I could
      make you understand...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You can&rsquo;t. You&rsquo;ll never make me understand how you came to render
      yourself so odiously notorious in Brittany.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, not odiously, monsieur!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Certainly, odiously&mdash;among those that matter. It is said even that
      you were Omnes Omnibus, though that I cannot, will not believe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yet it is true.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Kercadiou choked. &ldquo;And you confess it? You dare to confess it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a man dares to do, he should dare to confess&mdash;unless he is a
      coward.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, and to be sure you were very brave, running away each time after you
      had done the mischief, turning comedian to hide yourself, doing more
      mischief as a comedian, provoking a riot in Nantes, and then running away
      again, to become God knows what&mdash;something dishonest by the affluent
      look of you. My God, man, I tell you that in these past two years I have
      hoped that you were dead, and you profoundly disappoint me that you are
      not!&rdquo; He beat his hands together, and raised his shrill voice to call&mdash;&ldquo;Benoit!&rdquo;
       He strode away towards the fireplace, scarlet in the face, shaking with
      the passion into which he had worked himself. &ldquo;Dead, I might have forgiven
      you, as one who had paid for his evil, and his folly. Living, I never can
      forgive you. You have gone too far. God alone knows where it will end.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Benoit, the door. M. Andre-Louis Moreau to the door!&rdquo; The tone argued an
      irrevocable determination. Pale and self-contained, but with a queer pain
      at his heart, Andre-Louis heard that dismissal, saw Benoit&rsquo;s white, scared
      face and shaking hands half-raised as if he were about to expostulate with
      his master. And then another voice, a crisp, boyish voice, cut in.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Uncle!&rdquo; it cried, a world of indignation and surprise in its pitch, and
      then: &ldquo;Andre!&rdquo; And this time a note almost of gladness, certainly of
      welcome, was blended with the surprise that still remained.
    </p>
    <p>
      Both turned, half the room between them at the moment, and beheld Aline in
      one of the long, open windows, arrested there in the act of entering from
      the garden, Aline in a milk-maid bonnet of the latest mode, though without
      any of the tricolour embellishments that were so commonly to be seen upon
      them.
    </p>
    <p>
      The thin lips of Andre&rsquo;s long mouth twisted into a queer smile. Into his
      mind had flashed the memory of their last parting. He saw himself again,
      standing burning with indignation upon the pavement of Nantes, looking
      after her carriage as it receded down the Avenue de Gigan.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was coming towards him now with outstretched hands, a heightened
      colour in her cheeks, a smile of welcome on her lips. He bowed low and
      kissed her hand in silence.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then with a glance and a gesture she dismissed Benoit, and in her
      imperious fashion constituted herself Andre&rsquo;s advocate against that harsh
      dismissal which she had overheard.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Uncle,&rdquo; she said, leaving Andre and crossing to M. de Kercadiou, &ldquo;you
      make me ashamed of you! To allow a feeling of peevishness to overwhelm all
      your affection for Andre!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have no affection for him. I had once. He chose to extinguish it. He
      can go to the devil; and please observe that I don&rsquo;t permit you to
      interfere.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But if he confesses that he has done wrong...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He confesses nothing of the kind. He comes here to argue with me about
      these infernal Rights of Man. He proclaims himself unrepentant. He
      announces himself with pride to have been, as all Brittany says, the
      scoundrel who hid himself under the sobriquet of Omnes Omnibus. Is that to
      be condoned?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She turned to look at Andre across the wide space that now separated them.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But is this really so? Don&rsquo;t you repent, Andre&mdash;now that you see all
      the harm that has come?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was a clear invitation to him, a pleading to him to say that he
      repented, to make his peace with his godfather. For a moment it almost
      moved him. Then, considering the subterfuge unworthy, he answered
      truthfully, though the pain he was suffering rang in his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To confess repentance,&rdquo; he said slowly, &ldquo;would be to confess to a
      monstrous crime. Don&rsquo;t you see that? Oh, monsieur, have patience with me;
      let me explain myself a little. You say that I am in part responsible for
      something of all this that has happened. My exhortations of the people at
      Rennes and twice afterwards at Nantes are said to have had their share in
      what followed there. It may be so. It would be beyond my power positively
      to deny it. Revolution followed and bloodshed. More may yet come. To
      repent implies a recognition that I have done wrong. How shall I say that
      I have done wrong, and thus take a share of the responsibility for all
      that blood upon my soul? I will be quite frank with you to show you how
      far, indeed, I am from repentance. What I did, I actually did against all
      my convictions at the time. Because there was no justice in France to move
      against the murderer of Philippe de Vilmorin, I moved in the only way that
      I imagined could make the evil done recoil upon the hand that did it, and
      those other hands that had the power but not the spirit to punish. Since
      then I have come to see that I was wrong, and that Philippe de Vilmorin
      and those who thought with him were in the right.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You must realize, monsieur, that it is with sincerest thankfulness that I
      find I have done nothing calling for repentance; that, on the contrary,
      when France is given the inestimable boon of a constitution, as will
      shortly happen, I may take pride in having played my part in bringing
      about the conditions that have made this possible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There was a pause. M. de Kercadiou&rsquo;s face turned from pink to purple.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have quite finished?&rdquo; he said harshly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you have understood me, monsieur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I have understood you, and... and I beg that you will go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis shrugged his shoulders and hung his head. He had come there so
      joyously, in such yearning, merely to receive a final dismissal. He looked
      at Aline. Her face was pale and troubled; but her wit failed to show her
      how she could come to his assistance. His excessive honesty had burnt all
      his boats.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Very well, monsieur. Yet this I would ask you to remember after I am
      gone. I have not come to you as one seeking assistance, as one driven to
      you by need. I am no returning prodigal, as I have said. I am one who,
      needing nothing, asking nothing, master of his own destinies, has come to
      you driven by affection only, urged by the love and gratitude he bears you
      and will continue to bear you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, yes!&rdquo; cried Aline, turning now to her uncle. Here at least was an
      argument in Andre&rsquo;s favour, thought she. &ldquo;That is true. Surely that...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Inarticulately he hissed her into silence, exasperated.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hereafter perhaps that will help you to think of me more kindly,
      monsieur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I see no occasion, sir, to think of you at all. Again, I beg that you
      will go.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis looked at Aline an instant, as if still hesitating.
    </p>
    <p>
      She answered him by a glance at her furious uncle, a faint shrug, and a
      lift of the eyebrows, dejection the while in her countenance.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was as if she said: &ldquo;You see his mood. There is nothing to be done.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bowed with that singular grace the fencing-room had given him and went
      out by the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, it is cruel!&rdquo; cried Aline, in a stifled voice, her hands clenched,
      and she sprang to the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aline!&rdquo; her uncle&rsquo;s voice arrested her. &ldquo;Where are you going?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But we do not know where he is to be found.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who wants to find the scoundrel?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We may never see him again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is most fervently to be desired.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Aline said &ldquo;Ouf!&rdquo; and went out by the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      He called after her, imperiously commanding her return. But Aline&mdash;dutiful
      child&mdash;closed her ears lest she must disobey him, and sped
      light-footed across the lawn to the avenue there to intercept the
      departing Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      As he came forth wrapped in gloom, she stepped from the bordering trees
      into his path.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aline!&rdquo; he cried, joyously almost.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I did not want you to go like this. I couldn&rsquo;t let you,&rdquo; she explained
      herself. &ldquo;I know him better than you do, and I know that his great soft
      heart will presently melt. He will be filled with regret. He will want to
      send for you, and he will not know where to send.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You think that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I know it! You arrive in a bad moment. He is peevish and
      cross-grained, poor man, since he came here. These soft surroundings are
      all so strange to him. He wearies himself away from his beloved Gavrillac,
      his hunting and tillage, and the truth is that in his mind he very largely
      blames you for what has happened&mdash;for the necessity, or at least, the
      wisdom, of this change. Brittany, you must know, was becoming too unsafe.
      The chateau of La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, amongst others, was burnt to the ground
      some months ago. At any moment, given a fresh excitement, it may be the
      turn of Gavrillac. And for this and his present discomfort he blames you
      and your friends. But he will come round presently. He will be sorry that
      he sent you away like this&mdash;for I know that he loves you, Andre, in
      spite of all. I shall reason with him when the time comes. And then we
      shall want to know where to find you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;At number 13, Rue du Hasard. The number is unlucky, the name of the
      street appropriate. Therefore both are easy to remember.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She nodded. &ldquo;I will walk with you to the gates.&rdquo; And side by side now they
      proceeded at a leisurely pace down the long avenue in the June sunshine
      dappled by the shadows of the bordering trees. &ldquo;You are looking well,
      Andre; and do you know that you have changed a deal? I am glad that you
      have prospered.&rdquo; And then, abruptly changing the subject before he had
      time to answer her, she came to the matter uppermost in her mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have so wanted to see you in all these months, Andre. You were the only
      one who could help me; the only one who could tell me the truth, and I was
      angry with you for never having written to say where you were to be
      found.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course you encouraged me to do so when last we met in Nantes.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What? Still resentful?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am never resentful. You should know that.&rdquo; He expressed one of his
      vanities. He loved to think himself a Stoic. &ldquo;But I still bear the scar of
      a wound that would be the better for the balm of your retraction.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, then, I retract, Andre. And now tell me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, a self-seeking retraction,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;You give me something that you
      may obtain something.&rdquo; He laughed quite pleasantly. &ldquo;Well, well; command
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Tell me, Andre.&rdquo; She paused, as if in some difficulty, and then went on,
      her eyes upon the ground: &ldquo;Tell me&mdash;the truth of that event at the
      Feydau.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The request fetched a frown to his brow. He suspected at once the thought
      that prompted it. Quite simply and briefly he gave her his version of the
      affair.
    </p>
    <p>
      She listened very attentively. When he had done she sighed; her face was
      very thoughtful.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is much what I was told,&rdquo; she said. &ldquo;But it was added that M. de La
      Tour d&rsquo;Azyr had gone to the theatre expressly for the purpose of breaking
      finally with La Binet. Do you know if that was so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t; nor of any reason why it should be so. La Binet provided him the
      sort of amusement that he and his kind are forever craving...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, there was a reason,&rdquo; she interrupted him. &ldquo;I was the reason. I spoke
      to Mme. de Sautron. I told her that I would not continue to receive one
      who came to me contaminated in that fashion.&rdquo; She spoke of it with obvious
      difficulty, her colour rising as he watched her half-averted face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Had you listened to me...&rdquo; he was beginning, when again she interrupted
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M. de Sautron conveyed my decision to him, and afterwards represented him
      to me as a man in despair, repentant, ready to give proofs&mdash;any
      proofs&mdash;of his sincerity and devotion to me. He told me that M. de La
      Tour d&rsquo;Azyr had sworn to him that he would cut short that affair, that he
      would see La Binet no more. And then, on the very next day I heard of his
      having all but lost his life in that riot at the theatre. He had gone
      straight from that interview with M. de Sautron, straight from those
      protestations of future wisdom, to La Binet. I was indignant. I pronounced
      myself finally. I stated definitely that I would not in any circumstances
      receive M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr again! And then they pressed this explanation
      upon me. For a long time I would not believe it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So that you believe it now,&rdquo; said Andre quickly. &ldquo;Why?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have not said that I believe it now. But... but... neither can I
      disbelieve. Since we came to Meudon M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr has been here,
      and himself he has sworn to me that it was so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, if M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr has sworn...&rdquo; Andre-Louis was laughing on a
      bitter note of sarcasm.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you ever known him lie?&rdquo; she cut in sharply. That checked him. &ldquo;M.
      de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr is, after all, a man of honour, and men of honour never
      deal in falsehood. Have you ever known him do so, that you should sneer as
      you have done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; he confessed. Common justice demanded that he should admit that
      virtue at least in his enemy. &ldquo;I have not known him lie, it is true. His
      kind is too arrogant, too self-confident to have recourse to untruth. But
      I have known him do things as vile...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nothing is as vile,&rdquo; she interrupted, speaking from the code by which she
      had been reared. &ldquo;It is for liars only&mdash;who are first cousin to
      thieves&mdash;that there is no hope. It is in falsehood only that there is
      real loss of honour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are defending that satyr, I think,&rdquo; he said frostily.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I desire to be just.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Justice may seem to you a different matter when at last you shall have
      resolved yourself to become Marquise de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo; He spoke
      bitterly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think that I shall ever take that resolve.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you are still not sure&mdash;in spite of everything.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Can one ever be sure of anything in this world?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes. One can be sure of being foolish.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Either she did not hear or did not heed him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You do not of your own knowledge know that it was not as M. de La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr asserts&mdash;that he went to the Feydau that night?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t,&rdquo; he admitted. &ldquo;It is of course possible. But does it matter?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It might matter. Tell me; what became of La Binet after all?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t know.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You don&rsquo;t know?&rdquo; She turned to consider him. &ldquo;And you can say it with
      that indifference! I thought... I thought you loved her, Andre.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So did I, for a little while. I was mistaken. It required a La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr to disclose the truth to me. They have their uses, these gentlemen.
      They help stupid fellows like myself to perceive important truths. I was
      fortunate that revelation in my case preceded marriage. I can now look
      back upon the episode with equanimity and thankfulness for my near escape
      from the consequences of what was no more than an aberration of the
      senses. It is a thing commonly confused with love. The experience, as you
      see, was very instructive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She looked at him in frank surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you know, Andre, I sometimes think that you have no heart.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Presumably because I sometimes betray intelligence. And what of yourself,
      Aline? What of your own attitude from the outset where M. de La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr is concerned? Does that show heart? If I were to tell you what it
      really shows, we should end by quarrelling again, and God knows I can&rsquo;t
      afford to quarrel with you now. I... I shall take another way.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, nothing at the moment, for you are not in any danger of marrying
      that animal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And if I were?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah! In that case affection for you would discover to me some means of
      preventing it&mdash;unless...&rdquo; He paused.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Unless?&rdquo; she demanded, challengingly, drawn to the full of her short
      height, her eyes imperious.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Unless you could also tell me that you loved him,&rdquo; said he simply,
      whereat she was as suddenly and most oddly softened. And then he added,
      shaking his head: &ldquo;But that of course is impossible.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why?&rdquo; she asked him, quite gently now.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Because you are what you are, Aline&mdash;utterly good and pure and
      adorable. Angels do not mate with devils. His wife you might become, but
      never his mate, Aline&mdash;never.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They had reached the wrought-iron gates at the end of the avenue. Through
      these they beheld the waiting yellow chaise which had brought Andre-Louis.
      From near at hand came the creak of other wheels, the beat of other
      hooves, and now another vehicle came in sight, and drew to a stand-still
      beside the yellow chaise&mdash;a handsome equipage with polished mahogany
      panels on which the gold and azure of armorial bearings flashed
      brilliantly in the sunlight. A footman swung to earth to throw wide the
      gates; but in that moment the lady who occupied the carriage, perceiving
      Aline, waved to her and issued a command.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
