<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Climene</span></h2>
    <p>
      Diligent search among the many scenarios of the improvisers which have
      survived their day, has failed to bring to light the scenario of &ldquo;Les
      Fourberies de Scaramouche,&rdquo; upon which we are told the fortunes of the
      Binet troupe came to be soundly established. They played it for the first
      time at Maure in the following week, with Andre-Louis&mdash;who was known
      by now as Scaramouche to all the company, and to the public alike&mdash;in
      the title-role. If he had acquitted himself well as Figaro-Scaramouche, he
      excelled himself in the new piece, the scenario of which would appear to
      be very much the better of the two.
    </p>
    <p>
      After Maure came Pipriac, where four performances were given, two of each
      of the scenarios that now formed the backbone of the Binet repertoire. In
      both Scaramouche, who was beginning to find himself, materially improved
      his performances. So smoothly now did the two pieces run that Scaramouche
      actually suggested to Binet that after Fougeray, which they were to visit
      in the following week, they should tempt fortune in a real theatre in the
      important town of Redon. The notion terrified Binet at first, but coming
      to think of it, and his ambition being fanned by Andre-Louis, he ended by
      allowing himself to succumb to the temptation.
    </p>
    <p>
      It seemed to Andre-Louis in those days that he had found his real metier,
      and not only was he beginning to like it, but actually to look forward to
      a career as actor-author that might indeed lead him in the end to that
      Mecca of all comedians, the Comedie Francaise. And there were other
      possibilities. From the writing of skeleton scenarios for improvisers, he
      might presently pass to writing plays of dialogue, plays in the proper
      sense of the word, after the manner of Chenier, Eglantine, and
      Beaumarchais.
    </p>
    <p>
      The fact that he dreamed such dreams shows us how very kindly he had taken
      to the profession into which Chance and M. Binet between them had
      conspired to thrust him. That he had real talent both as author and as
      actor I do not doubt, and I am persuaded that had things fallen out
      differently he would have won for himself a lasting place among French
      dramatists, and thus fully have realized that dream of his.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, dream though it was, he did not neglect the practical side of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You realize,&rdquo; he told M. Binet, &ldquo;that I have it in my power to make your
      fortune for you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He and Binet were sitting alone together in the parlour of the inn at
      Pipriac, drinking a very excellent bottle of Volnay. It was on the night
      after the fourth and last performance there of &ldquo;Les Feurberies.&rdquo; The
      business in Pipriac had been as excellent as in Maure and Guichen. You
      will have gathered this from the fact that they drank Volnay.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will concede it, my dear Scaramouche, so that I may hear the sequel.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am disposed to exercise this power if the inducement is sufficient. You
      will realize that for fifteen livres a month a man does not sell such
      exceptional gifts as mine.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is an alternative,&rdquo; said M. Binet, darkly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is no alternative. Don&rsquo;t be a fool, Binet.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Binet sat up as if he had been prodded. Members of his company did not
      take this tone of direct rebuke with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyway, I make you a present of it,&rdquo; Scaramouche pursued, airily.
      &ldquo;Exercise it if you please. Step outside and inform the police that they
      can lay hands upon one Andre-Louis Moreau. But that will be the end of
      your fine dreams of going to Redon, and for the first time in your life
      playing in a real theatre. Without me, you can&rsquo;t do it, and you know it;
      and I am not going to Redon or anywhere else, in fact I am not even going
      to Fougeray, until we have an equitable arrangement.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what heat!&rdquo; complained Binet, &ldquo;and all for what? Why must you assume
      that I have the soul of a usurer? When our little arrangement was made, I
      had no idea how could I?&mdash;that you would prove as valuable to me as
      you are? You had but to remind me, my dear Scaramouche. I am a just man.
      As from to-day you shall have thirty livres a month. See, I double it at
      once. I am a generous man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you are not ambitious. Now listen to me, a moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And he proceeded to unfold a scheme that filled Binet with a paralyzing
      terror.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;After Redon, Nantes,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Nantes and the Theatre Feydau.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. Binet choked in the act of drinking. The Theatre Feydau was a sort of
      provincial Comedie Francaise. The great Fleury had played there to an
      audience as critical as any in France. The very thought of Redon,
      cherished as it had come to be by M. Binet, gave him at moments a cramp in
      the stomach, so dangerously ambitious did it seem to him. And Redon was a
      puppet-show by comparison with Nantes. Yet this raw lad whom he had picked
      up by chance three weeks ago, and who in that time had blossomed from a
      country attorney into author and actor, could talk of Nantes and the
      Theatre Feydau without changing colour.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why not Paris and the Comedie Francaise?&rdquo; wondered M. Binet, with
      sarcasm, when at last he had got his breath.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That may come later,&rdquo; says impudence.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Eh? You&rsquo;ve been drinking, my friend.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      But Andre-Louis detailed the plan that had been forming in his mind.
      Fougeray should be a training-ground for Redon, and Redon should be a
      training-ground for Nantes. They would stay in Redon as long as Redon
      would pay adequately to come and see them, working hard to perfect
      themselves the while. They would add three or four new players of talent
      to the company; he would write three or four fresh scenarios, and these
      should be tested and perfected until the troupe was in possession of at
      least half a dozen plays upon which they could depend; they would lay out
      a portion of their profits on better dresses and better scenery, and
      finally in a couple of months&rsquo; time, if all went well, they should be
      ready to make their real bid for fortune at Nantes. It was quite true that
      distinction was usually demanded of the companies appearing at the Feydau,
      but on the other hand Nantes had not seen a troupe of improvisers for a
      generation and longer. They would be supplying a novelty to which all
      Nantes should flock provided that the work were really well done, and
      Scaramouche undertook&mdash;pledged himself&mdash;that if matters were
      left in his own hands, his projected revival of the Commedia dell&rsquo; Arte in
      all its glories would exceed whatever expectations the public of Nantes
      might bring to the theatre.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll talk of Paris after Nantes,&rdquo; he finished, supremely matter-of-fact,
      &ldquo;just as we will definitely decide on Nantes after Redon.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The persuasiveness that could sway a mob ended by sweeping M. Binet off
      his feet. The prospect which Scaramouche unfolded, if terrifying, was also
      intoxicating, and as Scaramouche delivered a crushing answer to each
      weakening objection in a measure as it was advanced, Binet ended by
      promising to think the matter over.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Redon will point the way,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, &ldquo;and I don&rsquo;t doubt which way
      Redon will point.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus the great adventure of Redon dwindled to insignificance. Instead of a
      terrifying undertaking in itself, it became merely a rehearsal for
      something greater. In his momentary exaltation Binet proposed another
      bottle of Volnay. Scaramouche waited until the cork was drawn before he
      continued.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The thing remains possible,&rdquo; said he then, holding his glass to the
      light, and speaking casually, &ldquo;as long as I am with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Agreed, my dear Scaramouche, agreed. Our chance meeting was a fortunate
      thing for both of us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For both of us,&rdquo; said Scaramouche, with stress. &ldquo;That is as I would have
      it. So that I do not think you will surrender me just yet to the police.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As if I could think of such a thing! My dear Scaramouche, you amuse
      yourself. I beg that you will never, never allude to that little joke of
      mine again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is forgotten,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;And now for the remainder of my
      proposal. If I am to become the architect of your fortunes, if I am to
      build them as I have planned them, I must also and in the same degree
      become the architect of my own.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the same degree?&rdquo; M. Binet frowned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In the same degree. From to-day, if you please, we will conduct the
      affairs of this company in a proper manner, and we will keep
      account-books.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am an artist,&rdquo; said M. Binet, with pride. &ldquo;I am not a merchant.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is a business side to your art, and that shall be conducted in the
      business manner. I have thought it all out for you. You shall not be
      troubled with details that might hinder the due exercise of your art. All
      that you have to do is to say yes or no to my proposal.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah? And the proposal?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is that you constitute me your partner, with an equal share in the
      profits of your company.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Pantaloon&rsquo;s great countenance grew pale, his little eyes widened to their
      fullest extent as he conned the face of his companion. Then he exploded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are mad, of course, to make me a proposal so monstrous.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It has its injustices, I admit. But I have provided for them. It would
      not, for instance, be fair that in addition to all that I am proposing to
      do for you, I should also play Scaramouche and write your scenarios
      without any reward outside of the half-profit which would come to me as a
      partner. Thus before the profits come to be divided, there is a salary to
      be paid me as actor, and a small sum for each scenario with which I
      provide the company; that is a matter for mutual agreement. Similarly, you
      shall be paid a salary as Pantaloon. After those expenses are cleared up,
      as well as all the other salaries and disbursements, the residue is the
      profit to be divided equally between us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was not, as you can imagine, a proposal that M. Binet would swallow at
      a draught. He began with a point-blank refusal to consider it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In that case, my friend,&rdquo; said Scaramouche, &ldquo;we part company at once.
      To-morrow I shall bid you a reluctant farewell.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Binet fell to raging. He spoke of ingratitude in feeling terms; he even
      permitted himself another sly allusion to that little jest of his
      concerning the police, which he had promised never again to mention.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As to that, you may do as you please. Play the informer, by all means.
      But consider that you will just as definitely be deprived of my services,
      and that without me you are nothing&mdash;as you were before I joined your
      company.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. Binet did not care what the consequences might be. A fig for the
      consequences! He would teach this impudent young country attorney that M.
      Binet was not the man to be imposed upon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Scaramouche rose. &ldquo;Very well,&rdquo; said he, between indifference and
      resignation. &ldquo;As you wish. But before you act, sleep on the matter. In the
      cold light of morning you may see our two proposals in their proper
      proportions. Mine spells fortune for both of us. Yours spells ruin for
      both of us. Good-night, M. Binet. Heaven help you to a wise decision.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The decision to which M. Binet finally came was, naturally, the only one
      possible in the face of so firm a resolve as that of Andre-Louis, who held
      the trumps. Of course there were further discussions, before all was
      settled, and M. Binet was brought to an agreement only after an infinity
      of haggling surprising in one who was an artist and not a man of business.
      One or two concessions were made by Andre-Louis; he consented, for
      instance, to waive his claim to be paid for scenarios, and he also
      consented that M. Binet should appoint himself a salary that was out of
      all proportion to his deserts.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus in the end the matter was settled, and the announcement duly made to
      the assembled company. There were, of course, jealousies and resentments.
      But these were not deep-seated, and they were readily swallowed when it
      was discovered that under the new arrangement the lot of the entire
      company was to be materially improved from the point of view of salaries.
      This was a matter that had met with considerable opposition from M. Binet.
      But the irresistible Scaramouche swept away all objections.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If we are to play at the Feydau, you want a company of self-respecting
      comedians, and not a pack of cringing starvelings. The better we pay them
      in reason, the more they will earn for us.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thus was conquered the company&rsquo;s resentment of this too swift promotion of
      its latest recruit. Cheerfully now&mdash;with one exception&mdash;they
      accepted the dominance of Scaramouche, a dominance soon to be so firmly
      established that M. Binet himself came under it.
    </p>
    <p>
      The one exception was Climene. Her failure to bring to heel this
      interesting young stranger, who had almost literally dropped into their
      midst that morning outside Guichen, had begotten in her a malice which his
      persistent ignoring of her had been steadily inflaming. She had
      remonstrated with her father when the new partnership was first formed.
      She had lost her temper with him, and called him a fool, whereupon M.
      Binet&mdash;in Pantaloon&rsquo;s best manner&mdash;had lost his temper in his
      turn and boxed her ears. She piled it up to the account of Scaramouche,
      and spied her opportunity to pay off some of that ever-increasing score.
      But opportunities were few. Scaramouche was too occupied just then. During
      the week of preparation at Fougeray, he was hardly seen save at the
      performances, whilst when once they were at Redon, he came and went like
      the wind between the theatre and the inn.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Redon experiment had justified itself from the first. Stimulated and
      encouraged by this, Andre-Louis worked day and night during the month that
      they spent in that busy little town. The moment had been well chosen, for
      the trade in chestnuts of which Redon is the centre was just then at its
      height. And every afternoon the little theatre was packed with spectators.
      The fame of the troupe had gone forth, borne by the chestnut-growers of
      the district, who were bringing their wares to Redon market, and the
      audiences were made up of people from the surrounding country, and from
      neighbouring villages as far out as Allaire, Saint-Perrieux and
      Saint-Nicholas. To keep the business from slackening, Andre-Louis prepared
      a new scenario every week. He wrote three in addition to those two with
      which he had already supplied the company; these were &ldquo;The Marriage of
      Pantaloon,&rdquo; &ldquo;The Shy Lover,&rdquo; and &ldquo;The Terrible Captain.&rdquo; Of these the last
      was the greatest success. It was based upon the &ldquo;Miles Gloriosus&rdquo; of
      Plautus, with great opportunities for Rhodomont, and a good part for
      Scaramouche as the roaring captain&rsquo;s sly lieutenant. Its success was
      largely due to the fact that Andre-Louis amplified the scenario to the
      extent of indicating very fully in places the lines which the dialogue
      should follow, whilst here and there he had gone so far as to supply some
      of the actual dialogue to be spoken, without, however, making it
      obligatory upon the actors to keep to the letter of it.
    </p>
    <p>
      And meanwhile as the business prospered, he became busy with tailors,
      improving the wardrobe of the company, which was sorely in need of
      improvement. He ran to earth a couple of needy artists, lured them into
      the company to play small parts&mdash;apothecaries and notaries&mdash;and
      set them to beguile their leisure in painting new scenery, so as to be
      ready for what he called the conquest of Nantes, which was to come in the
      new year. Never in his life had he worked so hard; never in his life had
      he worked at all by comparison with his activities now. His fund of energy
      and enthusiasm was inexhaustible, like that of his good humour. He came
      and went, acted, wrote, conceived, directed, planned, and executed, what
      time M. Binet took his ease at last in comparative affluence, drank
      Burgundy every night, ate white bread and other delicacies, and began to
      congratulate himself upon his astuteness in having made this industrious,
      tireless fellow his partner. Having discovered how idle had been his fears
      of performing at Redon, he now began to dismiss the terrors with which the
      notion of Nantes had haunted him.
    </p>
    <p>
      And his happiness was reflected throughout the ranks of his company, with
      the single exception always of Climene. She had ceased to sneer at
      Scaramouche, having realized at last that her sneers left him untouched
      and recoiled upon herself. Thus her almost indefinable resentment of him
      was increased by being stifled, until, at all costs, an outlet for it must
      be found.
    </p>
    <p>
      One day she threw herself in his way as he was leaving the theatre after
      the performance. The others had already gone, and she had returned upon
      pretence of having forgotten something.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will you tell me what I have done to you?&rdquo; she asked him, point-blank.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Done to me, mademoiselle?&rdquo; He did not understand.
    </p>
    <p>
      She made a gesture of impatience. &ldquo;Why do you hate me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hate you, mademoiselle? I do not hate anybody. It is the most stupid of
      all the emotions. I have never hated&mdash;not even my enemies.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What Christian resignation!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As for hating you, of all people! Why... I consider you adorable. I envy
      Leandre every day of my life. I have seriously thought of setting him to
      play Scaramouche, and playing lovers myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think you would be a success,&rdquo; said she.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is the only consideration that restrains me. And yet, given the
      inspiration that is given Leandre, it is possible that I might be
      convincing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, what inspiration do you mean?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The inspiration of playing to so adorable a Climene.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Her lazy eyes were now alert to search that lean face of his.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are laughing at me,&rdquo; said she, and swept past him into the theatre on
      her pretended quest. There was nothing to be done with such a fellow. He
      was utterly without feeling. He was not a man at all.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yet when she came forth again at the end of some five minutes, she found
      him still lingering at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not gone yet?&rdquo; she asked him, superciliously.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I was waiting for you, mademoiselle. You will be walking to the inn. If I
      might escort you...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what gallantry! What condescension!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps you would prefer that I did not?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How could I prefer that, M. Scaramouche? Besides, we are both going the
      same way, and the streets are common to all. It is that I am overwhelmed
      by the unusual honour.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked into her piquant little face, and noted how obscured it was by
      its cloud of dignity. He laughed.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps I feared that the honour was not sought.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, now I understand,&rdquo; she cried. &ldquo;It is for me to seek these honours. I
      am to woo a man before he will pay me the homage of civility. It must be
      so, since you, who clearly know everything, have said so. It remains for
      me to beg your pardon for my ignorance.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It amuses you to be cruel,&rdquo; said Scaramouche. &ldquo;No matter. Shall we walk?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They set out together, stepping briskly to warm their blood against the
      wintry evening air. Awhile they went in silence, yet each furtively
      observing the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so, you find me cruel?&rdquo; she challenged him at length, thereby
      betraying the fact that the accusation had struck home.
    </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her with a half smile. &ldquo;Will you deny it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are the first man that ever accused me of that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I dare not suppose myself the first man to whom you have been cruel. That
      were an assumption too flattering to myself. I must prefer to think that
      the others suffered in silence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mon Dieu! Have you suffered?&rdquo; She was between seriousness and raillery.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I place the confession as an offering on the altar of your vanity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should never have suspected it.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How could you? Am I not what your father calls a natural actor? I was an
      actor long before I became Scaramouche. Therefore I have laughed. I often
      do when I am hurt. When you were pleased to be disdainful, I acted disdain
      in my turn.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You acted very well,&rdquo; said she, without reflecting.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course. I am an excellent actor.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And why this sudden change?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In response to the change in you. You have grown weary of your part of
      cruel madam&mdash;a dull part, believe me, and unworthy of your talents.
      Were I a woman and had I your loveliness and your grace, Climene, I should
      disdain to use them as weapons of offence.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Loveliness and grace!&rdquo; she echoed, feigning amused surprise. But the vain
      baggage was mollified. &ldquo;When was it that you discovered this beauty and
      this grace, M. Scaramouche?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her a moment, considering the sprightly beauty of her, the
      adorable femininity that from the first had so irresistibly attracted him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;One morning when I beheld you rehearsing a love-scene with Leandre.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He caught the surprise that leapt to her eyes, before she veiled them
      under drooping lids from his too questing gaze.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, that was the first time you saw me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I had no earlier occasion to remark your charms.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You ask me to believe too much,&rdquo; said she, but her tone was softer than
      he had ever known it yet.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Then you&rsquo;ll refuse to believe me if I confess that it was this grace and
      beauty that determined my destiny that day by urging me to join your
      father&rsquo;s troupe.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      At that she became a little out of breath. There was no longer any
      question of finding an outlet for resentment. Resentment was all
      forgotten.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why? With what object?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;With the object of asking you one day to be my wife.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She halted under the shock of that, and swung round to face him. Her
      glance met his own without, shyness now; there was a hardening glitter in
      her eyes, a faint stir of colour in her cheeks. She suspected him of an
      unpardonable mockery.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You go very fast, don&rsquo;t you?&rdquo; she asked him, with heat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I do. Haven&rsquo;t you observed it? I am a man of sudden impulses. See what I
      have made of the Binet troupe in less than a couple of months. Another
      might have laboured for a year and not achieved the half of it. Shall I be
      slower in love than in work? Would it be reasonable to expect it? I have
      curbed and repressed myself not to scare you by precipitancy. In that I
      have done violence to my feelings, and more than all in using the same
      cold aloofness with which you chose to treat me. I have waited&mdash;oh!
      so patiently&mdash;until you should tire of that mood of cruelty.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are an amazing man,&rdquo; said she, quite colourlessly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am,&rdquo; he agreed with her. &ldquo;It is only the conviction that I am not
      commonplace that has permitted me to hope as I have hoped.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Mechanically, and as if by tacit consent, they resumed their walk.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And I ask you to observe,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;when you complain that I go very
      fast, that, after all, I have so far asked you for nothing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How?&rdquo; quoth she, frowning.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have merely told you of my hopes. I am not so rash as to ask at once
      whether I may realize them.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My faith, but that is prudent,&rdquo; said she, tartly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It was his self-possession that exasperated her; for after that she walked
      the short remainder of the way in silence, and so, for the moment, the
      matter was left just there.
    </p>
    <p>
      But that night, after they had supped, it chanced that when Climene was
      about to retire, he and she were alone together in the room abovestairs
      that her father kept exclusively for his company. The Binet Troupe, you
      see, was rising in the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      As Climene now rose to withdraw for the night, Scaramouche rose with her
      to light her candle. Holding it in her left hand, she offered him her
      right, a long, tapering, white hand at the end of a softly rounded arm
      that was bare to the elbow.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good-night, Scaramouche,&rdquo; she said, but so softly, so tenderly, that he
      caught his breath, and stood conning her, his dark eyes aglow.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus a moment, then he took the tips of her fingers in his grasp, and
      bowing over the hand, pressed his lips upon it. Then he looked at her
      again. The intense femininity of her lured him on, invited him,
      surrendered to him. Her face was pale, there was a glitter in her eyes, a
      curious smile upon her parted lips, and under its fichu-menteur her bosom
      rose and fell to complete the betrayal of her.
    </p>
    <p>
      By the hand he continued to hold, he drew her towards him. She came
      unresisting. He took the candle from her, and set it down on the sideboard
      by which she stood. The next moment her slight, lithe body was in his
      arms, and he was kissing her, murmuring her name as if it were a prayer.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Am I cruel now?&rdquo; she asked him, panting. He kissed her again for only
      answer. &ldquo;You made me cruel because you would not see,&rdquo; she told him next
      in a whisper.
    </p>
    <p>
      And then the door opened, and M. Binet came in to have his paternal eyes
      regaled by this highly indecorous behaviour of his daughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      He stood at gaze, whilst they quite leisurely, and in a self-possession
      too complete to be natural, detached each from the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And what may be the meaning of this?&rdquo; demanded M. Binet, bewildered and
      profoundly shocked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Does it require explaining?&rdquo; asked Scaramouche. &ldquo;Doesn&rsquo;t it speak for
      itself&mdash;eloquently? It means that Climene and I have taken it into
      our heads to be married.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And doesn&rsquo;t it matter what I may take into my head?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course. But you could have neither the bad taste nor the bad heart to
      offer any obstacle.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You take that for granted? Aye, that is your way, to be sure&mdash;to
      take things for granted. But my daughter is not to be taken for granted. I
      have very definite views for my daughter. You have done an unworthy thing,
      Scaramouche. You have betrayed my trust in you. I am very angry with you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He rolled forward with his ponderous yet curiously noiseless gait.
      Scaramouche turned to her, smiling, and handed her the candle.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you will leave us, Climene, I will ask your hand of your father in
      proper form.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She vanished, a little fluttered, lovelier than ever in her mixture of
      confusion and timidity. Scaramouche closed the door and faced the enraged
      M. Binet, who had flung himself into an armchair at the head of the short
      table, faced him with the avowed purpose of asking for Climene&rsquo;s hand in
      proper form. And this was how he did it:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Father-in-law,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;I congratulate you. This will certainly mean
      the Comedie Francaise for Climene, and that before long, and you shall
      shine in the glory she will reflect. As the father of Madame Scaramouche
      you may yet be famous.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Binet, his face slowly empurpling, glared at him in speechless
      stupefaction. His rage was the more utter from his humiliating conviction
      that whatever he might say or do, this irresistible fellow would bend him
      to his will. At last speech came to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re a damned corsair,&rdquo; he cried, thickly, banging his ham-like fist
      upon the table. &ldquo;A corsair! First you sail in and plunder me of half my
      legitimate gains; and now you want to carry off my daughter. But I&rsquo;ll be
      damned if I&rsquo;ll give her to a graceless, nameless scoundrel like you, for
      whom the gallows are waiting already.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Scaramouche pulled the bell-rope, not at all discomposed. He smiled. There
      was a flush on his cheeks and a gleam in his eyes. He was very pleased
      with the world that night. He really owed a great debt to M. de
      Lesdiguieres.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Binet,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;forget for once that you are Pantaloon, and behave as a
      nice, amiable father-in-law should behave when he has secured a son-in-law
      of exceptionable merits. We are going to have a bottle of Burgundy at my
      expense, and it shall be the best bottle of Burgundy to be found in Redon.
      Compose yourself to do fitting honour to it. Excitations of the bile
      invariably impair the fine sensitiveness of the palate.&rdquo;
     </p>

</section></body></html>
