<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Windmill</span></h2>
    <p>
      There was between Nantes and Rennes an established service of three
      stage-coaches weekly in each direction, which for a sum of twenty-four
      livres&mdash;roughly, the equivalent of an English guinea&mdash;would
      carry you the seventy and odd miles of the journey in some fourteen hours.
      Once a week one of the diligences going in each direction would swerve
      aside from the highroad to call at Gavrillac, to bring and take letters,
      newspapers, and sometimes passengers. It was usually by this coach that
      Andre-Louis came and went when the occasion offered. At present, however,
      he was too much in haste to lose a day awaiting the passing of that
      diligence. So it was on a horse hired from the Breton arme that he set out
      next morning; and an hour&rsquo;s brisk ride under a grey wintry sky, by a
      half-ruined road through ten miles of flat, uninteresting country, brought
      him to the city of Rennes.
    </p>
    <p>
      He rode across the main bridge over the Vilaine, and so into the upper and
      principal part of that important city of some thirty thousand souls, most
      of whom, he opined from the seething, clamant crowds that everywhere
      blocked his way, must on this day have taken to the streets. Clearly
      Philippe had not overstated the excitement prevailing there.
    </p>
    <p>
      He pushed on as best he could, and so came at last to the Place Royale,
      where he found the crowd to be most dense. From the plinth of the
      equestrian statue of Louis XV, a white-faced young man was excitedly
      addressing the multitude. His youth and dress proclaimed the student, and
      a group of his fellows, acting as a guard of honour to him, kept the
      immediate precincts of the statue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Over the heads of the crowd Andre-Louis caught a few of the phrases flung
      forth by that eager voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It was the promise of the King... It is the King&rsquo;s authority they
      flout... They arrogate to themselves the whole sovereignty in Brittany.
      The King has dissolved them... These insolent nobles defying their
      sovereign and the people...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Had he not known already, from what Philippe had told him, of the events
      which had brought the Third Estate to the point of active revolt, those
      few phrases would fully have informed him. This popular display of temper
      was most opportune to his need, he thought. And in the hope that it might
      serve his turn by disposing to reasonableness the mind of the King&rsquo;s
      Lieutenant, he pushed on up the wide and well-paved Rue Royale, where the
      concourse of people began to diminish. He put up his hired horse at the
      Come de Cerf, and set out again, on foot, to the Palais de Justice.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a brawling mob by the framework of poles and scaffoldings about
      the building cathedral, upon which work had been commenced a year ago. But
      he did not pause to ascertain the particular cause of that gathering. He
      strode on, and thus came presently to the handsome Italianate palace that
      was one of the few public edifices that had survived the devastating fire
      of sixty years ago.
    </p>
    <p>
      He won through with difficulty to the great hall, known as the Salle des
      Pas Perdus, where he was left to cool his heels for a full half-hour after
      he had found an usher so condescending as to inform the god who presided
      over that shrine of Justice that a lawyer from Gavrillac humbly begged an
      audience on an affair of gravity.
    </p>
    <p>
      That the god condescended to see him at all was probably due to the grave
      complexion of the hour. At long length he was escorted up the broad stone
      staircase, and ushered into a spacious, meagrely furnished anteroom, to
      make one of a waiting crowd of clients, mostly men.
    </p>
    <p>
      There he spent another half-hour, and employed the time in considering
      exactly what he should say. This consideration made him realize the
      weakness of the case he proposed to set before a man whose views of law
      and morality were coloured by his social rank.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last he was ushered through a narrow but very massive and richly
      decorated door into a fine, well-lighted room furnished with enough gilt
      and satin to have supplied the boudoir of a lady of fashion.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was a trivial setting for a King&rsquo;s Lieutenant, but about the King&rsquo;s
      Lieutenant there was&mdash;at least to ordinary eyes&mdash;nothing
      trivial. At the far end of the chamber, to the right of one of the tall
      windows that looked out over the inner court, before a goat-legged
      writing-table with Watteau panels, heavily encrusted with ormolu, sat that
      exalted being. Above a scarlet coat with an order flaming on its breast,
      and a billow of lace in which diamonds sparkled like drops of water,
      sprouted the massive powdered head of M. de Lesdiguieres. It was thrown
      back to scowl upon this visitor with an expectant arrogance that made
      Andre-Louis wonder almost was a genuflexion awaited from him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Perceiving a lean, lantern-jawed young man, with straight, lank black
      hair, in a caped riding-coat of brown cloth, and yellow buckskin breeches,
      his knee-boots splashed with mud, the scowl upon that august visage
      deepened until it brought together the thick black eyebrows above the
      great hooked nose.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You announce yourself as a lawyer of Gavrillac with an important
      communication,&rdquo; he growled. It was a peremptory command to make this
      communication without wasting the valuable time of a King&rsquo;s Lieutenant, of
      whose immense importance it conveyed something more than a hint. M. de
      Lesdiguieres accounted himself an imposing personality, and he had every
      reason to do so, for in his time he had seen many a poor devil scared out
      of all his senses by the thunder of his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      He waited now to see the same thing happen to this youthful lawyer from
      Gavrillac. But he waited in vain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis found him ridiculous. He knew pretentiousness for the mask of
      worthlessness and weakness. And here he beheld pretentiousness incarnate.
      It was to be read in that arrogant poise of the head, that scowling brow,
      the inflexion of that reverberating voice. Even more difficult than it is
      for a man to be a hero to his valet&mdash;who has witnessed the dispersal
      of the parts that make up the imposing whole&mdash;is it for a man to be a
      hero to the student of Man who has witnessed the same in a different
      sense.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis stood forward boldly&mdash;impudently, thought M. de
      Lesdiguieres.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are His Majesty&rsquo;s Lieutenant here in Brittany,&rdquo; he said&mdash;and it
      almost seemed to the august lord of life and death that this fellow had
      the incredible effrontery to address him as one man speaking to another.
      &ldquo;You are the dispenser of the King&rsquo;s high justice in this province.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Surprise spread on that handsome, sallow face under the heavily powdered
      wig.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is your business concerned with this infernal insubordination of the
      canaille?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is not, monsieur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The black eyebrows rose. &ldquo;Then what the devil do you mean by intruding
      upon me at a time when all my attention is being claimed by the obvious
      urgency of this disgraceful affair?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The affair that brings me is no less disgraceful and no less urgent.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It will have to wait!&rdquo; thundered the great man in a passion, and tossing
      back a cloud of lace from his hand, he reached for the little silver bell
      upon his table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A moment, monsieur!&rdquo; Andre-Louis&rsquo; tone was peremptory. M. de Lesdiguieres
      checked in sheer amazement at its impudence. &ldquo;I can state it very
      briefly...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Haven&rsquo;t I said already...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And when you have heard it,&rdquo; Andre-Louis went on, relentlessly,
      interrupting the interruption, &ldquo;you will agree with me as to its
      character.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Lesdiguieres considered him very sternly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What is your name?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Andre-Louis Moreau.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, Andre-Louis Moreau, if you can state your plea briefly, I will hear
      you. But I warn you that I shall be very angry if you fail to justify the
      impertinence of this insistence at so inopportune a moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You shall be the judge of that, monsieur,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, and he
      proceeded at once to state his case, beginning with the shooting of Mabey,
      and passing thence to the killing of M. de Vilmorin. But he withheld until
      the end the name of the great gentleman against whom he demanded justice,
      persuaded that did he introduce it earlier he would not be allowed to
      proceed.
    </p>
    <p>
      He had a gift of oratory of whose full powers he was himself hardly
      conscious yet, though destined very soon to become so. He told his story
      well, without exaggeration, yet with a force of simple appeal that was
      irresistible. Gradually the great man&rsquo;s face relaxed from its forbidding
      severity. Interest, warming almost to sympathy, came to be reflected on
      it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And who, sir, is the man you charge with this?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The effect of that formidable name was immediate. Dismayed anger, and an
      arrogance more utter than before, took the place of the sympathy he had
      been betrayed into displaying.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who?&rdquo; he shouted, and without waiting for an answer, &ldquo;Why, here&rsquo;s
      impudence,&rdquo; he stormed on, &ldquo;to come before me with such a charge against a
      gentleman of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr&rsquo;s eminence! How dare you speak of him as
      a coward....&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I speak of him as a murderer,&rdquo; the young man corrected. &ldquo;And I demand
      justice against him.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You demand it, do you? My God, what next?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is for you to say, monsieur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It surprised the great gentleman into a more or less successful effort of
      self-control.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let me warn you,&rdquo; said he, acidly, &ldquo;that it is not wise to make wild
      accusations against a nobleman. That, in itself, is a punishable offence,
      as you may learn. Now listen to me. In this matter of Mabey&mdash;assuming
      your statement of it to be exact&mdash;the gamekeeper may have exceeded
      his duty; but by so little that it is hardly worth comment. Consider,
      however, that in any case it is not a matter for the King&rsquo;s Lieutenant, or
      for any court but the seigneurial court of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr himself.
      It is before the magistrates of his own appointing that such a matter must
      be laid, since it is matter strictly concerning his own seigneurial
      jurisdiction. As a lawyer you should not need to be told so much.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As a lawyer, I am prepared to argue the point. But, as a lawyer I also
      realize that if that case were prosecuted, it could only end in the unjust
      punishment of a wretched gamekeeper, who did no more than carry out his
      orders, but who none the less would now be made a scapegoat, if scapegoat
      were necessary. I am not concerned to hang Benet on the gallows earned by
      M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Lesdiguieres smote the table violently. &ldquo;My God!&rdquo; he cried out, to
      add more quietly, on a note of menace, &ldquo;You are singularly insolent, my
      man.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is not my intention, sir, I assure you. I am a lawyer, pleading a
      case&mdash;the case of M. de Vilmorin. It is for his assassination that I
      have come to beg the King&rsquo;s justice.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you yourself have said that it was a duel!&rdquo; cried the Lieutenant,
      between anger and bewilderment.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have said that it was made to appear a duel. There is a distinction, as
      I shall show, if you will condescend to hear me out.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take your own time, sir!&rdquo; said the ironical M. de Lesdiguieres, whose
      tenure of office had never yet held anything that remotely resembled this
      experience.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis took him literally. &ldquo;I thank you, sir,&rdquo; he answered, solemnly,
      and submitted his argument. &ldquo;It can be shown that M. de Vilmorin never
      practised fencing in all his life, and it is notorious that M. de La Tour
      d&rsquo;Azyr is an exceptional swordsman. Is it a duel, monsieur, where one of
      the combatants alone is armed? For it amounts to that on a comparison of
      their measures of respective skill.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There has scarcely been a duel fought on which the same trumpery argument
      might not be advanced.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But not always with equal justice. And in one case, at least, it was
      advanced successfully.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Successfully? When was that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ten years ago, in Dauphiny. I refer to the case of M. de Gesvres, a
      gentleman of that province, who forced a duel upon M. de la Roche
      Jeannine, and killed him. M. de Jeannine was a member of a powerful
      family, which exerted itself to obtain justice. It put forward just such
      arguments as now obtain against M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. As you will
      remember, the judges held that the provocation had proceeded of intent
      from M. de Gesvres; they found him guilty of premeditated murder, and he
      was hanged.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Lesdiguieres exploded yet again. &ldquo;Death of my life!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Have
      you the effrontery to suggest that M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr should be hanged?
      Have you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But why not, monsieur, if it is the law, and there is precedent for it,
      as I have shown you, and if it can be established that what I state is the
      truth&mdash;as established it can be without difficulty?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you ask me, why not? Have you temerity to ask me that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have, monsieur. Can you answer me? If you cannot, monsieur, I shall
      understand that whilst it is possible for a powerful family like that of
      La Roche Jeannine to set the law in motion, the law must remain inert for
      the obscure and uninfluential, however brutally wronged by a great
      nobleman.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Lesdiguieres perceived that in argument he would accomplish nothing
      against this impassive, resolute young man. The menace of him grew more
      fierce.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should advise you to take yourself off at once, and to be thankful for
      the opportunity to depart unscathed.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am, then, to understand, monsieur, that there will be no inquiry into
      this case? That nothing that I can say will move you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are to understand that if you are still there in two minutes it will
      be very much the worse for you.&rdquo; And M. de Lesdiguieres tinkled the silver
      hand-bell upon his table.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have informed you, monsieur, that a duel&mdash;so-called&mdash;has been
      fought, and a man killed. It seems that I must remind you, the
      administrator of the King&rsquo;s justice, that duels are against the law, and
      that it is your duty to hold an inquiry. I come as the legal
      representative of the bereaved mother of M. de Vilmorin to demand of you
      the inquiry that is due.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The door behind Andre-Louis opened softly. M. de Lesdiguieres, pale with
      anger, contained himself with difficulty.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You seek to compel us, do you, you impudent rascal?&rdquo; he growled. &ldquo;You
      think the King&rsquo;s justice is to be driven headlong by the voice of any
      impudent roturier? I marvel at my own patience with you. But I give you a
      last warning, master lawyer; keep a closer guard over that insolent tongue
      of yours, or you will have cause very bitterly to regret its glibness.&rdquo; He
      waved a jewelled, contemptuous hand, and spoke to the usher standing
      behind Andre. &ldquo;To the door!&rdquo; he said, shortly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis hesitated a second. Then with a shrug he turned. This was the
      windmill, indeed, and he a poor knight of rueful countenance. To attack it
      at closer quarters would mean being dashed to pieces. Yet on the threshold
      he turned again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M. de Lesdiguieres,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;may I recite to you an interesting fact in
      natural history? The tiger is a great lord in the jungle, and was for
      centuries the terror of lesser beasts, including the wolf. The wolf,
      himself a hunter, wearied of being hunted. He took to associating with
      other wolves, and then the wolves, driven to form packs for
      self-protection, discovered the power of the pack, and took to hunting the
      tiger, with disastrous results to him. You should study Buffon, M. de
      Lesdiguieres.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I have studied a buffoon this morning, I think,&rdquo; was the punning sneer
      with which M. de Lesdiguieres replied. But that he conceived himself
      witty, it is probable he would not have condescended to reply at all. &ldquo;I
      don&rsquo;t understand you,&rdquo; he added.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you will, M. de Lesdiguieres. You will,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, and so
      departed.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
