<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span><span epub:type="subtitle">The Aristocrat</span></h2>
    <p>
      The sleepy village of Gavrillac, a half-league removed from the main road
      to Rennes, and therefore undisturbed by the world&rsquo;s traffic, lay in a
      curve of the River Meu, at the foot, and straggling halfway up the slope,
      of the shallow hill that was crowned by the squat manor. By the time
      Gavrillac had paid tribute to its seigneur&mdash;partly in money and
      partly in service&mdash;tithes to the Church, and imposts to the King, it
      was hard put to it to keep body and soul together with what remained. Yet,
      hard as conditions were in Gavrillac, they were not so hard as in many
      other parts of France, not half so hard, for instance, as with the
      wretched feudatories of the great Lord of La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, whose vast
      possessions were at one point separated from this little village by the
      waters of the Meu.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Chateau de Gavrillac owed such seigneurial airs as might be claimed
      for it to its dominant position above the village rather than to any
      feature of its own. Built of granite, like all the rest of Gavrillac,
      though mellowed by some three centuries of existence, it was a squat,
      flat-fronted edifice of two stories, each lighted by four windows with
      external wooden shutters, and flanked at either end by two square towers
      or pavilions under extinguisher roofs. Standing well back in a garden,
      denuded now, but very pleasant in summer, and immediately fronted by a
      fine sweep of balustraded terrace, it looked, what indeed it was, and
      always had been, the residence of unpretentious folk who found more
      interest in husbandry than in adventure.
    </p>
    <p>
      Quintin de Kercadiou, Lord of Gavrillac&mdash;Seigneur de Gavrillac was
      all the vague title that he bore, as his forefathers had borne before him,
      derived no man knew whence or how&mdash;confirmed the impression that his
      house conveyed. Rude as the granite itself, he had never sought the
      experience of courts, had not even taken service in the armies of his
      King. He left it to his younger brother, Etienne, to represent the family
      in those exalted spheres. His own interests from earliest years had been
      centred in his woods and pastures. He hunted, and he cultivated his acres,
      and superficially he appeared to be little better than any of his rustic
      metayers. He kept no state, or at least no state commensurate with his
      position or with the tastes of his niece Aline de Kercadiou. Aline, having
      spent some two years in the court atmosphere of Versailles under the aegis
      of her uncle Etienne, had ideas very different from those of her uncle
      Quintin of what was befitting seigneurial dignity. But though this only
      child of a third Kercadiou had exercised, ever since she was left an
      orphan at the early age of four, a tyrannical rule over the Lord of
      Gavrillac, who had been father and mother to her, she had never yet
      succeeded in beating down his stubbornness on that score. She did not yet
      despair&mdash;persistence being a dominant note in her character&mdash;although
      she had been assiduously and fruitlessly at work since her return from the
      great world of Versailles some three months ago.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was walking on the terrace when Andre-Louis and M. de Vilmorin
      arrived. Her slight body was wrapped against the chill air in a white
      pelisse; her head was encased in a close-fitting bonnet, edged with white
      fur. It was caught tight in a knot of pale-blue ribbon on the right of her
      chin; on the left a long ringlet of corn-coloured hair had been permitted
      to escape. The keen air had whipped so much of her cheeks as was presented
      to it, and seemed to have added sparkle to eyes that were of darkest blue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis and M. de Vilmorin had been known to her from childhood. The
      three had been playmates once, and Andre-Louis&mdash;in view of his
      spiritual relationship with her uncle&mdash;she called her cousin. The
      cousinly relations had persisted between these two long after Philippe de
      Vilmorin had outgrown the earlier intimacy, and had become to her Monsieur
      de Vilmorin.
    </p>
    <p>
      She waved her hand to them in greeting as they advanced, and stood&mdash;an
      entrancing picture, and fully conscious of it&mdash;to await them at the
      end of the terrace nearest the short avenue by which they approached.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you come to see monsieur my uncle, you come inopportunely, messieurs,&rdquo;
       she told them, a certain feverishness in her air. &ldquo;He is closely&mdash;oh,
      so very closely&mdash;engaged.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;We will wait, mademoiselle,&rdquo; said M. de Vilmorin, bowing gallantly over
      the hand she extended to him. &ldquo;Indeed, who would haste to the uncle that
      may tarry a moment with the niece?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;M. l&rsquo;abbe,&rdquo; she teased him, &ldquo;when you are in orders I shall take you for
      my confessor. You have so ready and sympathetic an understanding.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But no curiosity,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;You haven&rsquo;t thought of that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I wonder what you mean, Cousin Andre.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well you may,&rdquo; laughed Philippe. &ldquo;For no one ever knows.&rdquo; And then, his
      glance straying across the terrace settled upon a carriage that was drawn
      up before the door of the chateau. It was a vehicle such as was often to
      be seen in the streets of a great city, but rarely in the country. It was
      a beautifully sprung two-horse cabriolet of walnut, with a varnish upon it
      like a sheet of glass and little pastoral scenes exquisitely painted on
      the panels of the door. It was built to carry two persons, with a box in
      front for the coachman, and a stand behind for the footman. This stand was
      empty, but the footman paced before the door, and as he emerged now from
      behind the vehicle into the range of M. de Vilmorin&rsquo;s vision, he displayed
      the resplendent blue-and-gold livery of the Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why!&rdquo; he exclaimed. &ldquo;Is it M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr who is with your uncle?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is, monsieur,&rdquo; said she, a world of mystery in voice and eyes, of
      which M. de Vilmorin observed nothing.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, pardon!&rdquo; he bowed low, hat in hand. &ldquo;Serviteur, mademoiselle,&rdquo; and he
      turned to depart towards the house.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Shall I come with you, Philippe?&rdquo; Andre-Louis called after him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It would be ungallant to assume that you would prefer it,&rdquo; said M. de
      Vilmorin, with a glance at mademoiselle. &ldquo;Nor do I think it would serve.
      If you will wait...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin strode off. Mademoiselle, after a moment&rsquo;s blank pause,
      laughed ripplingly. &ldquo;Now where is he going in such a hurry?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To see M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr as well as your uncle, I should say.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But he cannot. They cannot see him. Did I not say that they are very
      closely engaged? You don&rsquo;t ask me why, Andre.&rdquo; There was an arch
      mysteriousness about her, a latent something that may have been elation or
      amusement, or perhaps both. Andre-Louis could not determine it.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Since obviously you are all eagerness to tell, why should I ask?&rdquo; quoth
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If you are caustic I shall not tell you even if you ask. Oh, yes, I will.
      It will teach you to treat me with the respect that is my due.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I hope I shall never fail in that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Less than ever when you learn that I am very closely concerned in the
      visit of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. I am the object of this visit.&rdquo; And she
      looked at him with sparkling eyes and lips parted in laughter.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The rest, you would seem to imply, is obvious. But I am a dolt, if you
      please; for it is not obvious to me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, stupid, he comes to ask my hand in marriage.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Good God!&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, and stared at her, chapfallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      She drew back from him a little with a frown and an upward tilt of her
      chin. &ldquo;It surprises you?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It disgusts me,&rdquo; said he, bluntly. &ldquo;In fact, I don&rsquo;t believe it. You are
      amusing yourself with me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      For a moment she put aside her visible annoyance to remove his doubts. &ldquo;I
      am quite serious, monsieur. There came a formal letter to my uncle this
      morning from M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, announcing the visit and its object. I
      will not say that it did not surprise us a little...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh, I see,&rdquo; cried Andre-Louis, in relief. &ldquo;I understand. For a moment I
      had almost feared...&rdquo; He broke off, looked at her, and shrugged.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why do you stop? You had almost feared that Versailles had been wasted
      upon me. That I should permit the court-ship of me to be conducted like
      that of any village wench. It was stupid of you. I am being sought in
      proper form, at my uncle&rsquo;s hands.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is his consent, then, all that matters, according to Versailles?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What else?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There is your own.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She laughed. &ldquo;I am a dutiful niece... when it suits me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And will it suit you to be dutiful if your uncle accepts this monstrous
      proposal?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monstrous!&rdquo; She bridled. &ldquo;And why monstrous, if you please?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;For a score of reasons,&rdquo; he answered irritably.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Give me one,&rdquo; she challenged him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is twice your age.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Hardly so much,&rdquo; said she.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is forty-five, at least.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But he looks no more than thirty. He is very handsome&mdash;so much you
      will admit; nor will you deny that he is very wealthy and very powerful;
      the greatest nobleman in Brittany. He will make me a great lady.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God made you that, Aline.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Come, that&rsquo;s better. Sometimes you can almost be polite.&rdquo; And she moved
      along the terrace, Andre-Louis pacing beside her.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I can be more than that to show reason why you should not let this beast
      befoul the beautiful thing that God has made.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      She frowned, and her lips tightened. &ldquo;You are speaking of my future
      husband,&rdquo; she reproved him.
    </p>
    <p>
      His lips tightened too; his pale face grew paler.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And is it so? It is settled, then? Your uncle is to agree? You are to be
      sold thus, lovelessly, into bondage to a man you do not know. I had
      dreamed of better things for you, Aline.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Better than to be Marquise de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He made a gesture of exasperation. &ldquo;Are men and women nothing more than
      names? Do the souls of them count for nothing? Is there no joy in life, no
      happiness, that wealth and pleasure and empty, high-sounding titles are to
      be its only aims? I had set you high&mdash;so high, Aline&mdash;a thing
      scarce earthly. There is joy in your heart, intelligence in your mind;
      and, as I thought, the vision that pierces husks and shams to claim the
      core of reality for its own. Yet you will surrender all for a parcel of
      make-believe. You will sell your soul and your body to be Marquise de La
      Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are indelicate,&rdquo; said she, and though she frowned her eyes laughed.
      &ldquo;And you go headlong to conclusions. My uncle will not consent to more
      than to allow my consent to be sought. We understand each other, my uncle
      and I. I am not to be bartered like a turnip.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He stood still to face her, his eyes glowing, a flush creeping into his
      pale cheeks.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have been torturing me to amuse yourself!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Ah, well, I
      forgive you out of my relief.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Again you go too fast, Cousin Andre I have permitted my uncle to consent
      that M. le Marquis shall make his court to me. I like the look of the
      gentleman. I am flattered by his preference when I consider his eminence.
      It is an eminence that I may find it desirable to share. M. le Marquis
      does not look as if he were a dullard. It should be interesting to be
      wooed by him. It may be more interesting still to marry him, and I think,
      when all is considered, that I shall probably&mdash;very probably&mdash;decide
      to do so.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He looked at her, looked at the sweet, challenging loveliness of that
      childlike face so tightly framed in the oval of white fur, and all the
      life seemed to go out of his own countenance.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;God help you, Aline!&rdquo; he groaned.
    </p>
    <p>
      She stamped her foot. He was really very exasperating, and something
      presumptuous too, she thought.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are insolent, monsieur.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is never insolent to pray, Aline. And I did no more than pray, as I
      shall continue to do. You&rsquo;ll need my prayers, I think.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are insufferable!&rdquo; She was growing angry, as he saw by the deepening
      frown, the heightened colour.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is because I suffer. Oh, Aline, little cousin, think well of what
      you do; think well of the realities you will be bartering for these shams&mdash;the
      realities that you will never know, because these cursed shams will block
      your way to them. When M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr comes to make his court, study
      him well; consult your fine instincts; leave your own noble nature free to
      judge this animal by its intuitions. Consider that...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I consider, monsieur, that you presume upon the kindness I have always
      shown you. You abuse the position of toleration in which you stand. Who
      are you? What are you, that you should have the insolence to take this
      tone with me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bowed, instantly his cold, detached self again, and resumed the mockery
      that was his natural habit.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;My congratulations, mademoiselle, upon the readiness with which you begin
      to adapt yourself to the great role you are to play.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Do you adapt yourself also, monsieur,&rdquo; she retorted angrily, and turned
      her shoulder to him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To be as the dust beneath the haughty feet of Madame la Marquise. I hope
      I shall know my place in future.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The phrase arrested her. She turned to him again, and he perceived that
      her eyes were shining now suspiciously. In an instant the mockery in him
      was quenched in contrition.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lord, what a beast I am, Aline!&rdquo; he cried, as he advanced. &ldquo;Forgive me if
      you can.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Almost had she turned to sue forgiveness from him. But his contrition
      removed the need.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I&rsquo;ll try,&rdquo; said she, &ldquo;provided that you undertake not to offend again.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But I shall,&rdquo; said he. &ldquo;I am like that. I will fight to save you, from
      yourself if need be, whether you forgive me or not.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      They were standing so, confronting each other a little breathlessly, a
      little defiantly, when the others issued from the porch.
    </p>
    <p>
      First came the Marquis of La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, Count of Solz, Knight of the
      Orders of the Holy Ghost and Saint Louis, and Brigadier in the armies of
      the King. He was a tall, graceful man, upright and soldierly of carriage,
      with his head disdainfully set upon his shoulders. He was magnificently
      dressed in a full-skirted coat of mulberry velvet that was laced with
      gold. His waistcoat, of velvet too, was of a golden apricot colour; his
      breeches and stockings were of black silk, and his lacquered, red-heeled
      shoes were buckled in diamonds. His powdered hair was tied behind in a
      broad ribbon of watered silk; he carried a little three-cornered hat under
      his arm, and a gold-hilted slender dress-sword hung at his side.
    </p>
    <p>
      Considering him now in complete detachment, observing the magnificence of
      him, the elegance of his movements, the great air, blending in so
      extraordinary a manner disdain and graciousness, Andre-Louis trembled for
      Aline. Here was a practised, irresistible wooer, whose bonnes fortunes
      were become a by-word, a man who had hitherto been the despair of dowagers
      with marriageable daughters, and the desolation of husbands with
      attractive wives.
    </p>
    <p>
      He was immediately followed by M. de Kercadiou, in completest contrast. On
      legs of the shortest, the Lord of Gavrillac carried a body that at
      forty-five was beginning to incline to corpulence and an enormous head
      containing an indifferent allotment of intelligence. His countenance was
      pink and blotchy, liberally branded by the smallpox which had almost
      extinguished him in youth. In dress he was careless to the point of
      untidiness, and to this and to the fact that he had never married&mdash;disregarding
      the first duty of a gentleman to provide himself with an heir&mdash;he
      owed the character of misogynist attributed to him by the countryside.
    </p>
    <p>
      After M. de Kercadiou came M. de Vilmorin, very pale and self-contained,
      with tight lips and an overcast brow.
    </p>
    <p>
      To meet them, there stepped from the carriage a very elegant young
      gentleman, the Chevalier de Chabrillane, M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr&rsquo;s cousin,
      who whilst awaiting his return had watched with considerable interest&mdash;his
      own presence unsuspected&mdash;the perambulations of Andre-Louis and
      mademoiselle.
    </p>
    <p>
      Perceiving Aline, M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr detached himself from the others,
      and lengthening his stride came straight across the terrace to her.
    </p>
    <p>
      To Andre-Louis the Marquis inclined his head with that mixture of
      courtliness and condescension which he used. Socially, the young lawyer
      stood in a curious position. By virtue of the theory of his birth, he
      ranked neither as noble nor as simple, but stood somewhere between the two
      classes, and whilst claimed by neither he was used familiarly by both.
      Coldly now he returned M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr&rsquo;s greeting, and discreetly
      removed himself to go and join his friend.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Marquis took the hand that mademoiselle extended to him, and bowing
      over it, bore it to his lips.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Mademoiselle,&rdquo; he said, looking into the blue depths of her eyes, that
      met his gaze smiling and untroubled, &ldquo;monsieur your uncle does me the
      honour to permit that I pay my homage to you. Will you, mademoiselle, do
      me the honour to receive me when I come to-morrow? I shall have something
      of great importance for your ear.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of importance, M. le Marquis? You almost frighten me.&rdquo; But there was no
      fear on the serene little face in its furred hood. It was not for nothing
      that she had graduated in the Versailles school of artificialities.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That,&rdquo; said he, &ldquo;is very far from my design.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But of importance to yourself, monsieur, or to me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To us both, I hope,&rdquo; he answered her, a world of meaning in his fine,
      ardent eyes.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You whet my curiosity, monsieur; and, of course, I am a dutiful niece. It
      follows that I shall be honoured to receive you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not honoured, mademoiselle; you will confer the honour. To-morrow at this
      hour, then, I shall have the felicity to wait upon you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He bowed again; and again he bore her fingers to his lips, what time she
      curtsied. Thereupon, with no more than this formal breaking of the ice,
      they parted.
    </p>
    <p>
      She was a little breathless now, a little dazzled by the beauty of the
      man, his princely air, and the confidence of power he seemed to radiate.
      Involuntarily almost, she contrasted him with his critic&mdash;the lean
      and impudent Andre-Louis in his plain brown coat and steel-buckled shoes&mdash;and
      she felt guilty of an unpardonable offence in having permitted even one
      word of that presumptuous criticism. To-morrow M. le Marquis would come to
      offer her a great position, a great rank. And already she had derogated
      from the increase of dignity accruing to her from his very intention to
      translate her to so great an eminence. Not again would she suffer it; not
      again would she be so weak and childish as to permit Andre-Louis to utter
      his ribald comments upon a man by comparison with whom he was no better
      than a lackey.
    </p>
    <p>
      Thus argued vanity and ambition with her better self and to her vast
      annoyance her better self would not admit entire conviction.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile, M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr was climbing into his carriage. He had
      spoken a word of farewell to M. de Kercadiou, and he had also had a word
      for M. de Vilmorin in reply to which M. de Vilmorin had bowed in assenting
      silence. The carriage rolled away, the powdered footman in blue-and-gold
      very stiff behind it, M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr bowing to mademoiselle, who
      waved to him in answer.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then M. de Vilmorin put his arm through that of Andre Louis, and said to
      him, &ldquo;Come, Andre.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But you&rsquo;ll stay to dine, both of you!&rdquo; cried the hospitable Lord of
      Gavrillac. &ldquo;We&rsquo;ll drink a certain toast,&rdquo; he added, winking an eye that
      strayed towards mademoiselle, who was approaching. He had no subtleties,
      good soul that he was.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. de Vilmorin deplored an appointment that prevented him doing himself
      the honour. He was very stiff and formal.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And you, Andre?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I? Oh, I share the appointment, godfather,&rdquo; he lied, &ldquo;and I have a
      superstition against toasts.&rdquo; He had no wish to remain. He was angry with
      Aline for her smiling reception of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr and the sordid
      bargain he saw her set on making. He was suffering from the loss of an
      illusion.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
