<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
﻿<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Transition</span></h2>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may agree,&rdquo; wrote Andre-Louis from Paris to Le Chapelier, in a letter
      which survives, &ldquo;that it is to be regretted I should definitely have
      discarded the livery of Scaramouche, since clearly there could be no
      livery fitter for my wear. It seems to be my part always to stir up strife
      and then to slip away before I am caught in the crash of the warring
      elements I have aroused. It is a humiliating reflection. I seek
      consolation in the reminder of Epictetus (do you ever read Epictetus?)
      that we are but actors in a play of such a part as it may please the
      Director to assign us. It does not, however, console me to have been cast
      for a part so contemptible, to find myself excelling ever in the art of
      running away. But if I am not brave, at least I am prudent; so that where
      I lack one virtue I may lay claim to possessing another almost to excess.
      On a previous occasion they wanted to hang me for sedition. Should I have
      stayed to be hanged? This time they may want to hang me for several
      things, including murder; for I do not know whether that scoundrel Binet
      be alive or dead from the dose of lead I pumped into his fat paunch. Nor
      can I say that I very greatly care. If I have a hope at all in the matter
      it is that he is dead&mdash;and damned. But I am really indifferent. My
      own concerns are troubling me enough. I have all but spent the little
      money that I contrived to conceal about me before I fled from Nantes on
      that dreadful night; and both of the only two professions of which I can
      claim to know anything&mdash;the law and the stage&mdash;are closed to me,
      since I cannot find employment in either without revealing myself as a
      fellow who is urgently wanted by the hangman. As things are it is very
      possible that I may die of hunger, especially considering the present
      price of victuals in this ravenous city. Again I have recourse to
      Epictetus for comfort. &lsquo;It is better,&rsquo; he says, &lsquo;to die of hunger having
      lived without grief and fear, than to live with a troubled spirit amid
      abundance.&rsquo; I seem likely to perish in the estate that he accounts so
      enviable. That it does not seem exactly enviable to me merely proves that
      as a Stoic I am not a success.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      There is also another letter of his written at about the same time to the
      Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr&mdash;a letter since published by M. Emile
      Quersac in his &ldquo;Undercurrents of the Revolution in Brittany,&rdquo; unearthed by
      him from the archives of Rennes, to which it had been consigned by M. de
      Lesdiguieres, who had received it for justiciary purposes from the
      Marquis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The Paris newspapers,&rdquo; he writes in this, &ldquo;which have reported in
      considerable detail the fracas at the Theatre Feydau and disclosed the
      true identity of the Scaramouche who provoked it, inform me also that you
      have escaped the fate I had intended for you when I raised that storm of
      public opinion and public indignation. I would not have you take
      satisfaction in the thought that I regret your escape. I do not. I rejoice
      in it. To deal justice by death has this disadvantage that the victim has
      no knowledge that justice has overtaken him. Had you died, had you been
      torn limb from limb that night, I should now repine in the thought of your
      eternal and untroubled slumber. Not in euthanasia, but in torment of mind
      should the guilty atone. You see, I am not sure that hell hereafter is a
      certainty, whilst I am quite sure that it can be a certainty in this life;
      and I desire you to continue to live yet awhile that you may taste
      something of its bitterness.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You murdered Philippe de Vilmorin because you feared what you described
      as his very dangerous gift of eloquence, I took an oath that day that your
      evil deed should be fruitless; that I would render it so; that the voice
      you had done murder to stifle should in spite of that ring like a trumpet
      through the land. That was my conception of revenge. Do you realize how I
      have been fulfilling it, how I shall continue to fulfil it as occasion
      offers? In the speech with which I fired the people of Rennes on the very
      morrow of that deed, did you not hear the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin
      uttering the ideas that were his with a fire and a passion greater than he
      could have commanded because Nemesis lent me her inflaming aid? In the
      voice of Omnes Omnibus at Nantes my voice again&mdash;demanding the
      petition that sounded the knell of your hopes of coercing the Third
      Estate, did you not hear again the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin? Did you
      not reflect that it was the mind of the man you had murdered, resurrected
      in me his surviving friend, which made necessary your futile attempt under
      arms last January, wherein your order, finally beaten, was driven to seek
      sanctuary in the Cordelier Convent? And that night when from the stage of
      the Feydau you were denounced to the people, did you not hear yet again,
      in the voice of Scaramouche, the voice of Philippe de Vilmorin, using that
      dangerous gift of eloquence which you so foolishly imagined you could
      silence with a sword-thrust? It is becoming a persecution&mdash;is it not?&mdash;this
      voice from the grave that insists upon making itself heard, that will not
      rest until you have been cast into the pit. You will be regretting by now
      that you did not kill me too, as I invited you on that occasion. I can
      picture to myself the bitterness of this regret, and I contemplate it with
      satisfaction. Regret of neglected opportunity is the worst hell that a
      living soul can inhabit, particularly such a soul as yours. It is because
      of this that I am glad to know that you survived the riot at the Feydau,
      although at the time it was no part of my intention that you should.
      Because of this I am content that you should live to enrage and suffer in
      the shadow of your evil deed, knowing at last&mdash;since you had not
      hitherto the wit to discern it for yourself&mdash;that the voice of
      Philippe de Vilmorin will follow you to denounce you ever more loudly,
      ever more insistently, until having lived in dread you shall go down in
      blood under the just rage which your victim&rsquo;s dangerous gift of eloquence
      is kindling against you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      I find it odd that he should have omitted from this letter all mention of
      Mlle. Binet, and I am disposed to account it at least a partial
      insincerity that he should have assigned entirely to his self-imposed
      mission, and not at all to his lacerated feelings in the matter of
      Climene, the action which he had taken at the Feydau.
    </p>
    <p>
      Those two letters, both written in April of that year 1789, had for only
      immediate effect to increase the activity with which Andre-Louis Moreau
      was being sought.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier would have found him so as to lend him assistance, to urge
      upon him once again that he should take up a political career. The
      electors of Nantes would have found him&mdash;at least, they would have
      found Omnes Omnibus, of whose identity with himself they were still in
      ignorance&mdash;on each of the several occasions when a vacancy occurred
      in their body. And the Marquis de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr and M. de Lesdiguieres
      would have found him that they might send him to the gallows.
    </p>
    <p>
      With a purpose no less vindictive was he being sought by M. Binet, now
      unhappily recovered from his wound to face completest ruin. His troupe had
      deserted him during his illness, and reconstituted under the direction of
      Polichinelle it was now striving with tolerable success to continue upon
      the lines which Andre-Louis had laid down. M. le Marquis, prevented by the
      riot from expressing in person to Mlle. Binet his purpose of making an end
      of their relations, had been constrained to write to her to that effect
      from Azyr a few days later. He tempered the blow by enclosing in discharge
      of all liabilities a bill on the Caisse d&rsquo;Escompte for a hundred louis.
      Nevertheless it almost crushed the unfortunate and it enabled her father
      when he recovered to enrage her by pointing out that she owed this turn of
      events to the premature surrender she had made in defiance of his sound
      worldly advice. Father and daughter alike were left to assign the Marquis&rsquo;
      desertion, naturally enough, to the riot at the Feydau. They laid that
      with the rest to the account of Scaramouche, and were forced in bitterness
      to admit that the scoundrel had taken a superlative revenge. Climene may
      even have come to consider that it would have paid her better to have run
      a straight course with Scaramouche and by marrying him to have trusted to
      his undoubted talents to place her on the summit to which her ambition
      urged her, and to which it was now futile for her to aspire. If so, that
      reflection must have been her sufficient punishment. For, as Andre-Louis
      so truly says, there is no worse hell than that provided by the regrets
      for wasted opportunities.
    </p>
    <p>
      Meanwhile the fiercely sought Andre-Louis Moreau had gone to earth
      completely for the present. And the brisk police of Paris, urged on by the
      King&rsquo;s Lieutenant from Rennes, hunted for him in vain. Yet he might have
      been found in a house in the Rue du Hasard within a stone&rsquo;s throw of the
      Palais Royal, whither purest chance had conducted him.
    </p>
    <p>
      That which in his letter to Le Chapelier he represents as a contingency of
      the near future was, in fact, the case in which already he found himself.
      He was destitute. His money was exhausted, including that procured by the
      sale of such articles of adornment as were not of absolute necessity.
    </p>
    <p>
      So desperate was his case that strolling one gusty April morning down the
      Rue du Hasard with his nose in the wind looking for what might be picked
      up, he stopped to read a notice outside the door of a house on the left
      side of the street as you approach the Rue de Richelieu. There was no
      reason why he should have gone down the Rue du Hasard. Perhaps its name
      attracted him, as appropriate to his case.
    </p>
    <p>
      The notice written in a big round hand announced that a young man of good
      address with some knowledge of swordsmanship was required by M. Bertrand
      des Amis on the second floor. Above this notice was a black oblong board,
      and on this a shield, which in vulgar terms may be described as red
      charged with two swords crossed and four fleurs de lys, one in each angle
      of the saltire. Under the shield, in letters of gold, ran the legend:
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
                     BERTRAND DES AMIS

        Maitre en fait d&rsquo;Armes des Academies du Roi
</pre>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis stood considering. He could claim, he thought, to possess the
      qualifications demanded. He was certainly young and he believed of
      tolerable address, whilst the fencing-lessons he had received in Nantes
      had given him at least an elementary knowledge of swordsmanship. The
      notice looked as if it had been pinned there some days ago, suggesting
      that applicants for the post were not very numerous. In that case perhaps
      M. Bertrand des Amis would not be too exigent. And anyway, Andre-Louis had
      not eaten for four-and-twenty hours, and whilst the employment here
      offered&mdash;the precise nature of which he was yet to ascertain&mdash;did
      not appear to be such as Andre-Louis would deliberately have chosen, he
      was in no case now to be fastidious.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, too, he liked the name of Bertrand des Amis. It felicitously
      combined suggestions of chivalry and friendliness. Also the man&rsquo;s
      profession being of a kind that is flavoured with romance it was possible
      that M. Bertrand des Amis would not ask too many questions.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the end he climbed to the second floor. On the landing he paused
      outside a door, on which was written &ldquo;Academy of M. Bertrand des Amis.&rdquo; He
      pushed this open, and found himself in a sparsely furnished, untenanted
      antechamber. From a room beyond, the door of which was closed, came the
      stamping of feet, the click and slither of steel upon steel, and
      dominating these sounds a vibrant sonorous voice speaking a language that
      was certainly French; but such French as is never heard outside a
      fencing-school.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Coulez! Mais, coulez donc!.... So! Now the flanconnade&mdash;en carte....
      And here is the riposte.... Let us begin again. Come! The ward of
      fierce.... Make the coupe, and then the quinte par dessus les armes.... O,
      mais allongez! Allongez! Allez au fond!&rdquo; the voice cried in expostulation.
      &ldquo;Come, that was better.&rdquo; The blades ceased.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Remember: the hand in pronation, the elbow not too far out. That will do
      for to-day. On Wednesday we shall see you tirer au mur. It is more
      deliberate. Speed will follow when the mechanism of the movements is more
      assured.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Another voice murmured in answer. The steps moved aside. The lesson was at
      an end. Andre-Louis tapped on the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was opened by a tall, slender, gracefully proportioned man of perhaps
      forty. Black silk breeches and stockings ending in light shoes clothed him
      from the waist down. Above he was encased to the chin in a closely fitting
      plastron of leather, His face was aquiline and swarthy, his eyes full and
      dark, his mouth firm and his clubbed hair was of a lustrous black with
      here and there a thread of silver showing.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the crook of his left arm he carried a fencing-mask, a thing of leather
      with a wire grating to protect the eyes. His keen glance played over
      Andre-Louis from head to foot.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Monsieur?&rdquo; he inquired, politely.
    </p>
    <p>
      It was clear that he mistook Andre-Louis&rsquo; quality, which is not
      surprising, for despite his sadly reduced fortunes, his exterior was
      irreproachable, and M. des Amis was not to guess that he carried upon his
      back the whole of his possessions.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You have a notice below, monsieur,&rdquo; he said, and from the swift lighting
      of the fencing-master&rsquo;s eyes he saw that he had been correct in his
      assumption that applicants for the position had not been jostling one
      another on his threshold. And then that flash of satisfaction was followed
      by a look of surprise.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are come in regard to that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis shrugged and half smiled. &ldquo;One must live,&rdquo; said he.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But come in. Sit down there. I shall be at your.... I shall be free to
      attend to you in a moment.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis took a seat on the bench ranged against one of the whitewashed
      walls. The room was long and low, its floor entirely bare. Plain wooden
      forms such as that which he occupied were placed here and there against
      the wall. These last were plastered with fencing trophies, masks, crossed
      foils, stuffed plastrons, and a variety of swords, daggers, and targets,
      belonging to a variety of ages and countries. There was also a portrait of
      an obese, big-nosed gentleman in an elaborately curled wig, wearing the
      blue ribbon of the Saint Esprit, in whom Andre-Louis recognized the King.
      And there was a framed parchment&mdash;M. des Amis&rsquo; certificate from the
      King&rsquo;s Academy. A bookcase occupied one corner, and near this, facing the
      last of the four windows that abundantly lighted the long room, there was
      a small writing-table and an armchair. A plump and beautifully dressed
      young gentleman stood by this table in the act of resuming coat and wig.
      M. des Amis sauntered over to him&mdash;moving, thought Andre-Louis, with
      extraordinary grace and elasticity&mdash;and stood in talk with him whilst
      also assisting him to complete his toilet.
    </p>
    <p>
      At last the young gentleman took his departure, mopping himself with a
      fine kerchief that left a trail of perfume on the air. M. des Amis closed
      the door, and turned to the applicant, who rose at once.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Where have you studied?&rdquo; quoth the fencing-master abruptly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Studied?&rdquo; Andre-Louis was taken aback by the question. &ldquo;Oh, at Louis Le
      Grand.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. des Amis frowned, looking up sharply as if to see whether his applicant
      was taking the liberty of amusing himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In Heaven&rsquo;s name! I am not asking you where you did your humanities, but
      in what academy you studied fencing.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh&mdash;fencing!&rdquo; It had hardly ever occurred to Andre-Louis that the
      sword ranked seriously as a study. &ldquo;I never studied it very much. I had
      some lessons in... in the country once.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The master&rsquo;s eyebrows went up. &ldquo;But then?&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Why trouble to come
      up two flights of stairs?&rdquo; He was impatient.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;The notice does not demand a high degree of proficiency. If I am not
      proficient enough, yet knowing the rudiments I can easily improve. I learn
      most things readily,&rdquo; Andre-Louis commended himself. &ldquo;For the rest: I
      possess the other qualifications. I am young, as you observe: and I leave
      you to judge whether I am wrong in assuming that my address is good. I am
      by profession a man of the robe, though I realize that the motto here is
      cedat toga armis.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. des Amis smiled approvingly. Undoubtedly the young man had a good
      address, and a certain readiness of wit, it would appear. He ran a
      critical eye over his physical points. &ldquo;What is your name?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis hesitated a moment. &ldquo;Andre-Louis,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      The dark, keen eyes conned him more searchingly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well? Andre-Louis what?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Just Andre-Louis. Louis is my surname.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh! An odd surname. You come from Brittany by your accent. Why did you
      leave it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To save my skin,&rdquo; he answered, without reflecting. And then made haste to
      cover the blunder. &ldquo;I have an enemy,&rdquo; he explained.
    </p>
    <p>
      M. des Amis frowned, stroking his square chin. &ldquo;You ran away?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may say so.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A coward, eh?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think so.&rdquo; And then he lied romantically. Surely a man who lived
      by the sword should have a weakness for the romantic. &ldquo;You see, my enemy
      is a swordsman of great strength&mdash;the best blade in the province, if
      not the best blade in France. That is his repute. I thought I would come
      to Paris to learn something of the art, and then go back and kill him.
      That, to be frank, is why your notice attracted me. You see, I have not
      the means to take lessons otherwise. I thought to find work here in the
      law. But I have failed. There are too many lawyers in Paris as it is, and
      whilst waiting I have consumed the little money that I had, so that... so
      that, enfin, your notice seemed to me something to which a special
      providence had directed me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. des Amis gripped him by the shoulders, and looked into his face.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Is this true, my friend?&rdquo; he asked.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a word of it,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, wrecking his chances on an
      irresistible impulse to say the unexpected. But he didn&rsquo;t wreck them. M.
      des Amis burst into laughter; and having laughed his fill, confessed
      himself charmed by his applicant&rsquo;s fundamental honesty.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Take off your coat,&rdquo; he said, &ldquo;and let us see what you can do. Nature, at
      least, designed you for a swordsman. You are light, active, and supple,
      with a good length of arm, and you seem intelligent. I may make something
      of you, teach you enough for my purpose, which is that you should give the
      elements of the art to new pupils before I take them in hand to finish
      them. Let us try. Take that mask and foil, and come over here.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He led him to the end of the room, where the bare floor was scored with
      lines of chalk to guide the beginner in the management of his feet.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the end of a ten minutes&rsquo; bout, M. des Amis offered him the situation,
      and explained it. In addition to imparting the rudiments of the art to
      beginners, he was to brush out the fencing-room every morning, keep the
      foils furbished, assist the gentlemen who came for lessons to dress and
      undress, and make himself generally useful. His wages for the present were
      to be forty livres a month, and he might sleep in an alcove behind the
      fencing-room if he had no other lodging.
    </p>
    <p>
      The position, you see, had its humiliations. But, if Andre-Louis would
      hope to dine, he must begin by eating his pride as an hors d&rsquo;oeuvre.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And so,&rdquo; he said, controlling a grimace, &ldquo;the robe yields not only to the
      sword, but to the broom as well. Be it so. I stay.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      It is characteristic of him that, having made that choice, he should have
      thrown himself into the work with enthusiasm. It was ever his way to do
      whatever he did with all the resources of his mind and energies of his
      body. When he was not instructing very young gentlemen in the elements of
      the art, showing them the elaborate and intricate salute&mdash;which with
      a few days&rsquo; hard practice he had mastered to perfection&mdash;and the
      eight guards, he was himself hard at work on those same guards, exercising
      eye, wrist, and knees.
    </p>
    <p>
      Perceiving his enthusiasm, and seeing the obvious possibilities it opened
      out of turning him into a really effective assistant, M. des Amis
      presently took him more seriously in hand.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Your application and zeal, my friend, are deserving of more than forty
      livres a month,&rdquo; the master informed him at the end of a week. &ldquo;For the
      present, however, I will make up what else I consider due to you by
      imparting to you secrets of this noble art. Your future depends upon how
      you profit by your exceptional good fortune in receiving instruction from
      me.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Thereafter every morning before the opening of the academy, the master
      would fence for half an hour with his new assistant. Under this really
      excellent tuition Andre-Louis improved at a rate that both astounded and
      flattered M. des Amis. He would have been less flattered and more
      astounded had he known that at least half the secret of Andre-Louis&rsquo;
      amazing progress lay in the fact that he was devouring the contents of the
      master&rsquo;s library, which was made up of a dozen or so treatises on fencing
      by such great masters as La Bessiere, Danet, and the syndic of the King&rsquo;s
      Academy, Augustin Rousseau. To M. des Amis, whose swordsmanship was all
      based on practice and not at all on theory, who was indeed no theorist or
      student in any sense, that little library was merely a suitable adjunct to
      a fencing-academy, a proper piece of decorative furniture. The books
      themselves meant nothing to him in any other sense. He had not the type of
      mind that could have read them with profit nor could he understand that
      another should do so. Andre-Louis, on the contrary, a man with the habit
      of study, with the acquired faculty of learning from books, read those
      works with enormous profit, kept their precepts in mind, critically set
      off those of one master against those of another, and made for himself a
      choice which he proceeded to put into practice.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the end of a month it suddenly dawned upon M. des Amis that his
      assistant had developed into a fencer of very considerable force, a man in
      a bout with whom it became necessary to exert himself if he were to escape
      defeat.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said from the first,&rdquo; he told him one day, &ldquo;that Nature designed you
      for a swordsman. See how justified I was, and see also how well I have
      known how to mould the material with which Nature has equipped you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;To the master be the glory,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      His relations with M. des Amis had meanwhile become of the friendliest,
      and he was now beginning to receive from him other pupils than mere
      beginners. In fact Andre-Louis was becoming an assistant in a much fuller
      sense of the word. M. des Amis, a chivalrous, open-handed fellow, far from
      taking advantage of what he had guessed to be the young man&rsquo;s
      difficulties, rewarded his zeal by increasing his wages to four louis a
      month.
    </p>
    <p>
      From the earnest and thoughtful study of the theories of others, it
      followed now&mdash;as not uncommonly happens&mdash;that Andre-Louis came
      to develop theories of his own. He lay one June morning on his little
      truckle bed in the alcove behind the academy, considering a passage that
      he had read last night in Danet on double and triple feints. It had seemed
      to him when reading it that Danet had stopped short on the threshold of a
      great discovery in the art of fencing. Essentially a theorist, Andre-Louis
      perceived the theory suggested, which Danet himself in suggesting it had
      not perceived. He lay now on his back, surveying the cracks in the ceiling
      and considering this matter further with the lucidity that early morning
      often brings to an acute intelligence. You are to remember that for close
      upon two months now the sword had been Andre-Louis&rsquo; daily exercise and
      almost hourly thought. Protracted concentration upon the subject was
      giving him an extraordinary penetration of vision. Swordsmanship as he
      learnt and taught and saw it daily practised consisted of a series of
      attacks and parries, a series of disengages from one line into another.
      But always a limited series. A half-dozen disengages on either side was,
      strictly speaking, usually as far as any engagement went. Then one
      recommenced. But even so, these disengages were fortuitous. What if from
      first to last they should be calculated?
    </p>
    <p>
      That was part of the thought&mdash;one of the two legs on which his theory
      was to stand; the other was: what would happen if one so elaborated
      Danet&rsquo;s ideas on the triple feint as to merge them into a series of actual
      calculated disengages to culminate at the fourth or fifth or even sixth
      disengage? That is to say, if one were to make a series of attacks
      inviting ripostes again to be countered, each of which was not intended to
      go home, but simply to play the opponent&rsquo;s blade into a line that must
      open him ultimately, and as predetermined, for an irresistible lunge. Each
      counter of the opponent&rsquo;s would have to be preconsidered in this widening
      of his guard, a widening so gradual that he should himself be unconscious
      of it, and throughout intent upon getting home his own point on one of
      those counters.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis had been in his time a chess-player of some force, and at
      chess he had excelled by virtue of his capacity for thinking ahead. That
      virtue applied to fencing should all but revolutionize the art. It was so
      applied already, of course, but only in an elementary and very limited
      fashion, in mere feints, single, double, or triple. But even the triple
      feint should be a clumsy device compared with this method upon which he
      theorized.
    </p>
    <p>
      He considered further, and the conviction grew that he held the key of a
      discovery. He was impatient to put his theory to the test.
    </p>
    <p>
      That morning he was given a pupil of some force, against whom usually he
      was hard put to it to defend himself. Coming on guard, he made up his mind
      to hit him on the fourth disengage, predetermining the four passes that
      should lead up to it. They engaged in tierce, and Andre-Louis led the
      attack by a beat and a straightening of the arm. Came the demi-contre he
      expected, which he promptly countered by a thrust in quinte; this being
      countered again, he reentered still lower, and being again correctly
      parried, as he had calculated, he lunged swirling his point into carte,
      and got home full upon his opponent&rsquo;s breast. The ease of it surprised
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      They began again. This time he resolved to go in on the fifth disengage,
      and in on that he went with the same ease. Then, complicating the matter
      further, he decided to try the sixth, and worked out in his mind the
      combination of the five preliminary engages. Yet again he succeeded as
      easily as before.
    </p>
    <p>
      The young gentleman opposed to him laughed with just a tinge of
      mortification in his voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I am all to pieces this morning,&rdquo; he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You are not of your usual force,&rdquo; Andre-Louis politely agreed. And then
      greatly daring, always to test that theory of his to the uttermost: &ldquo;So
      much so,&rdquo; he added, &ldquo;that I could almost be sure of hitting you as and
      when I declare.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The capable pupil looked at him with a half-sneer. &ldquo;Ah, that, no,&rdquo; said
      he.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Let us try. On the fourth disengage I shall touch you. Allons! En garde!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And as he promised, so it happened.
    </p>
    <p>
      The young gentleman who, hitherto, had held no great opinion of
      Andre-Louis&rsquo; swordsmanship, accounting him well enough for purposes of
      practice when the master was otherwise engaged, opened wide his eyes. In a
      burst of mingled generosity and intoxication, Andre-Louis was almost for
      disclosing his method&mdash;a method which a little later was to become a
      commonplace of the fencing-rooms. Betimes he checked himself. To reveal
      his secret would be to destroy the prestige that must accrue to him from
      exercising it.
    </p>
    <p>
      At noon, the academy being empty, M. des Amis called Andre-Louis to one of
      the occasional lessons which he still received. And for the first time in
      all his experience with Andre-Louis, M. des Amis received from him a full
      hit in the course of the first bout. He laughed, well pleased, like the
      generous fellow he was.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Aha! You are improving very fast, my friend.&rdquo; He still laughed, though
      not so well pleased, when he was hit in the second bout. After that he
      settled down to fight in earnest with the result that Andre-Louis was hit
      three times in succession. The speed and accuracy of the fencing-master
      when fully exerting himself disconcerted Andre-Louis&rsquo; theory, which for
      want of being exercised in practice still demanded too much consideration.
    </p>
    <p>
      But that his theory was sound he accounted fully established, and with
      that, for the moment, he was content. It remained only to perfect by
      practice the application of it. To this he now devoted himself with the
      passionate enthusiasm of the discoverer. He confined himself to a
      half-dozen combinations, which he practised assiduously until each had
      become almost automatic. And he proved their infallibility upon the best
      among M. des Amis&rsquo; pupils.
    </p>
    <p>
      Finally, a week or so after that last bout of his with des Amis, the
      master called him once more to practice.
    </p>
    <p>
      Hit again in the first bout, the master set himself to exert all his skill
      against his assistant. But to-day it availed him nothing before
      Andre-Louis&rsquo; impetuous attacks.
    </p>
    <p>
      After the third hit, M. des Amis stepped back and pulled off his mask.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What&rsquo;s this?&rdquo; he asked. He was pale, and his dark brows were contracted
      in a frown. Not in years had he been so wounded in his self-love. &ldquo;Have
      you been taught a secret botte?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He had always boasted that he knew too much about the sword to believe any
      nonsense about secret bottes; but this performance of Andre-Louis&rsquo; had
      shaken his convictions on that score.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis. &ldquo;I have been working hard; and it happens that I
      fence with my brains.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So I perceive. Well, well, I think I have taught you enough, my friend. I
      have no intention of having an assistant who is superior to myself.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Little danger of that,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, smiling pleasantly. &ldquo;You have
      been fencing hard all morning, and you are tired, whilst I, having done
      little, am entirely fresh. That is the only secret of my momentary
      success.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      His tact and the fundamental good-nature of M. des Amis prevented the
      matter from going farther along the road it was almost threatening to
      take. And thereafter, when they fenced together, Andre-Louis, who
      continued daily to perfect his theory into an almost infallible system,
      saw to it that M. des Amis always scored against him at least two hits for
      every one of his own. So much he would grant to discretion, but no more.
      He desired that M. des Amis should be conscious of his strength, without,
      however, discovering so much of its real extent as would have excited in
      him an unnecessary degree of jealousy.
    </p>
    <p>
      And so well did he contrive that whilst he became ever of greater
      assistance to the master&mdash;for his style and general fencing, too, had
      materially improved&mdash;he was also a source of pride to him as the most
      brilliant of all the pupils that had ever passed through his academy.
      Never did Andre-Louis disillusion him by revealing the fact that his skill
      was due far more to M. des Amis&rsquo; library and his own mother wit than to
      any lessons received.
    </p>

</section></body></html>
