<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="title"><span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span><span epub:type="subtitle">Politicians</span></h2>
    <p>
      One morning in August the academy in the Rue du Hasard was invaded by Le
      Chapelier accompanied by a man of remarkable appearance, whose herculean
      stature and disfigured countenance seemed vaguely familiar to Andre-Louis.
      He was a man of little, if anything, over thirty, with small bright eyes
      buried in an enormous face. His cheek-bones were prominent, his nose awry,
      as if it had been broken by a blow, and his mouth was rendered almost
      shapeless by the scars of another injury. (A bull had horned him in the
      face when he was but a lad.) As if that were not enough to render his
      appearance terrible, his cheeks were deeply pock-marked. He was dressed
      untidily in a long scarlet coat that descended almost to his ankles,
      soiled buckskin breeches and boots with reversed tops. His shirt, none too
      clean, was open at the throat, the collar hanging limply over an unknotted
      cravat, displaying fully the muscular neck that rose like a pillar from
      his massive shoulders. He swung a cane that was almost a club in his left
      hand, and there was a cockade in his biscuit-coloured, conical hat. He
      carried himself with an aggressive, masterful air, that great head of his
      thrown back as if he were eternally at defiance.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier, whose manner was very grave, named him to Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This is M. Danton, a brother-lawyer, President of the Cordeliers, of whom
      you will have heard.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Of course Andre-Louis had heard of him. Who had not, by then?
    </p>
    <p>
      Looking at him now with interest, Andre-Louis wondered how it came that
      all, or nearly all the leading innovators, were pock-marked. Mirabeau, the
      journalist Desmoulins, the philanthropist Marat, Robespierre the little
      lawyer from Arras, this formidable fellow Danton, and several others he
      could call to mind all bore upon them the scars of smallpox. Almost he
      began to wonder was there any connection between the two. Did an attack of
      smallpox produce certain moral results which found expression in this way?
    </p>
    <p>
      He dismissed the idle speculation, or rather it was shattered by the
      startling thunder of Danton&rsquo;s voice.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;This &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; Chapelier has told me of you. He says that you
      are a patriotic &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      More than by the tone was Andre-Louis startled by the obscenities with
      which the Colossus did not hesitate to interlard his first speech to a
      total stranger. He laughed outright. There was nothing else to do.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If he has told you that, he has told you more than the truth! I am a
      patriot. The rest my modesty compels me to disavow.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;re a joker too, it seems,&rdquo; roared the other, but he laughed
      nevertheless, and the volume of it shook the windows. &ldquo;There&rsquo;s no offence
      in me. I am like that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What a pity,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      It disconcerted the king of the markets. &ldquo;Eh? what&rsquo;s this, Chapelier? Does
      he give himself airs, your friend here?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      The spruce Breton, a very petit-maitre in appearance by contrast with his
      companion, but nevertheless of a down-right manner quite equal to Danton&rsquo;s
      in brutality, though dispensing with the emphasis of foulness, shrugged as
      he answered him:
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is merely that he doesn&rsquo;t like your manners, which is not at all
      surprising. They are execrable.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, bah! You are all like that, you &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; Bretons. Let&rsquo;s
      come to business. You&rsquo;ll have heard what took place in the Assembly
      yesterday? You haven&rsquo;t? My God, where do you live? Have you heard that
      this scoundrel who calls himself King of France gave passage across French
      soil the other day to Austrian troops going to crush those who fight for
      liberty in Belgium? Have you heard that, by any chance?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis coldly, masking his irritation before the other&rsquo;s
      hectoring manner. &ldquo;I have heard that.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Oh! And what do you think of it?&rdquo; Arms akimbo, the Colossus towered above
      him.
    </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis turned aside to Le Chapelier.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I don&rsquo;t think I understand. Have you brought this gentleman here to
      examine my conscience?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Name of a name! He&rsquo;s prickly as a &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; porcupine!&rdquo;
       Danton protested.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No, no.&rdquo; Le Chapelier was conciliatory, seeking to provide an antidote to
      the irritant administered by his companion. &ldquo;We require your help, Andre.
      Danton here thinks that you are the very man for us. Listen now...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s it. You tell him,&rdquo; Danton agreed. &ldquo;You both talk the same mincing&mdash;sort
      of French. He&rsquo;ll probably understand you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier went on without heeding the interruption. &ldquo;This violation by
      the King of the obvious rights of a country engaged in framing a
      constitution that shall make it free has shattered every philanthropic
      illusion we still cherished. There are those who go so far as to proclaim
      the King the vowed enemy of France. But that, of course, is excessive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who says so?&rdquo; blazed Danton, and swore horribly by way of conveying his
      total disagreement.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier waved him into silence, and proceeded.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Anyhow, the matter has been more than enough, added to all the rest, to
      set us by the ears again in the Assembly. It is open war between the Third
      Estate and the Privileged.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Was it ever anything else?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Perhaps not; but it has assumed a new character. You&rsquo;ll have heard of the
      duel between Lameth and the Duc de Castries?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;A trifling affair.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;In its results. But it might have been far other. Mirabeau is challenged
      and insulted now at every sitting. But he goes his way, cold-bloodedly
      wise. Others are not so circumspect; they meet insult with insult, blow
      with blow, and blood is being shed in private duels. The thing is reduced
      by these swordsmen of the nobility to a system.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis nodded. He was thinking of Philippe de Vilmorin. &ldquo;Yes,&rdquo; he
      said, &ldquo;it is an old trick of theirs. It is so simple and direct&mdash;like
      themselves. I wonder only that they didn&rsquo;t hit upon this system sooner. In
      the early days of the States General, at Versailles, it might have had a
      better effect. Now, it comes a little late.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But they mean to make up for lost time&mdash;sacred name!&rdquo; cried Danton.
      &ldquo;Challenges are flying right and left between these bully-swordsmen, these
      spadassinicides, and poor devils of the robe who have never learnt to
      fence with anything but a quill. It&rsquo;s just &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; murder.
      Yet if I were to go amongst messieurs les nobles and crunch an addled head
      or two with this stick of mine, snap a few aristocratic necks between
      these fingers which the good God has given me for the purpose, the law
      would send me to atone upon the gallows. This in a land that is striving
      after liberty. Why, Dieu me damne! I am not even allowed to keep my hat on
      in the theatre. But they &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; these &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;s!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He is right,&rdquo; said Le Chapelier. &ldquo;The thing has become unendurable,
      insufferable. Two days ago M. d&rsquo;Ambly threatened Mirabeau with his cane
      before the whole Assembly. Yesterday M. de Faussigny leapt up and
      harangued his order by inviting murder. &lsquo;Why don&rsquo;t we fall on these
      scoundrels, sword in hand?&rsquo; he asked. Those were his very words: &lsquo;Why
      don&rsquo;t we fall on these scoundrels, sword in hand.&rsquo;&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is so much simpler than lawmaking,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Lagron, the deputy from Ancenis in the Loire, said something that we did
      not hear in answer. As he was leaving the Manege one of these bullies
      grossly insulted him. Lagron no more than used his elbow to push past when
      the fellow cried out that he had been struck, and issued his challenge.
      They fought this morning early in the Champs Elysees, and Lagron was
      killed, run through the stomach deliberately by a man who fought like a
      fencing-master, and poor Lagron did not even own a sword. He had to borrow
      one to go to the assignation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis&mdash;his mind ever on Vilmorin, whose case was here repeated,
      even to the details&mdash;was swept by a gust of passion. He clenched his
      hands, and his jaws set. Danton&rsquo;s little eyes observed him keenly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well? And what do you think of that? Noblesse oblige, eh? The thing is we
      must oblige them too, these &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-s. We must pay them back
      in the same coin; meet them with the same weapons. Abolish them; tumble
      these assassinateurs into the abyss of nothingness by the same means.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But how?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;How? Name of God! Haven&rsquo;t I said it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That is where we require your help,&rdquo; Le Chapelier put in. &ldquo;There must be
      men of patriotic feeling among the more advanced of your pupils. M.
      Danton&rsquo;s idea is that a little band of these&mdash;say a half-dozen, with
      yourself at their head&mdash;might read these bullies a sharp lesson.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis frowned.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And how, precisely, had M. Danton thought that this might be done?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. Danton spoke for himself, vehemently.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, thus: We post you in the Manege, at the hour when the Assembly is
      rising. We point out the six leading phlebotomists, and let you loose to
      insult them before they have time to insult any of the representatives.
      Then to-morrow morning, six &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; phlebotomists themselves
      phlebotomized secundum artem. That will give the others something to think
      about. It will give them a great deal to think about, by &mdash;&mdash;!
      If necessary the dose may be repeated to ensure a cure. If you kill the
      &mdash;&mdash;&mdash;-s, so much the better.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      He paused, his sallow face flushed with the enthusiasm of his idea.
      Andre-Louis stared at him inscrutably.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Well, what do you say to that?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That it is most ingenious.&rdquo; And Andre-Louis turned aside to look out of
      the window.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And is that all you think of it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I will not tell you what else I think of it because you probably would
      not understand. For you, M. Danton, there is at least this excuse that you
      did not know me. But you, Isaac&mdash;to bring this gentleman here with
      such a proposal!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier was overwhelmed in confusion. &ldquo;I confess I hesitated,&rdquo; he
      apologized. &ldquo;But M. Danton would not take my word for it that the proposal
      might not be to your taste.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I would not!&rdquo; Danton broke in, bellowing. He swung upon Le Chapelier,
      brandishing his great arms. &ldquo;You told me monsieur was a patriot.
      Patriotism knows no scruples. You call this mincing dancing-master a
      patriot?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Would you, monsieur, out of patriotism consent to become an assassin?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Of course I would. Haven&rsquo;t I told you so? Haven&rsquo;t I told you that I would
      gladly go among them with my club, and crack them like so many&mdash;fleas?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why not? Because I should get myself hanged. Haven&rsquo;t I said so?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;But what of that &mdash;&mdash;&mdash; being a patriot? Why not, like
      another Curtius, jump into the gulf, since you believe that your country
      would benefit by your death?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      M. Danton showed signs of exasperation. &ldquo;Because my country will benefit
      more by my life.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Permit me, monsieur, to suffer from a similar vanity.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You? But where would be the danger to you? You would do your work under
      the cloak of duelling&mdash;as they do.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Have you reflected, monsieur, that the law will hardly regard a
      fencing-master who kills his opponent as an ordinary combatant,
      particularly if it can be shown that the fencing-master himself provoked
      the attack?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;So! Name of a name!&rdquo; M. Danton blew out his cheeks and delivered himself
      with withering scorn. &ldquo;It comes to this, then: you are afraid!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You may think so if you choose&mdash;that I am afraid to do slyly and
      treacherously that which a thrasonical patriot like yourself is afraid of
      doing frankly and openly. I have other reasons. But that one should
      suffice you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Danton gasped. Then he swore more amazingly and variedly than ever.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;By &mdash;&mdash;! you are right,&rdquo; he admitted, to Andre-Louis&rsquo;
      amazement. &ldquo;You are right, and I am wrong. I am as bad a patriot as you
      are, and I am a coward as well.&rdquo; And he invoked the whole Pantheon to
      witness his self-denunciation. &ldquo;Only, you see, I count for something: and
      if they take me and hang me, why, there it is! Monsieur, we must find some
      other way. Forgive the intrusion. Adieu!&rdquo; He held out his enormous hand..
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier stood hesitating, crestfallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You understand, Andre? I am sorry that...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Say no more, please. Come and see me soon again. I would press you to
      remain, but it is striking nine, and the first of my pupils is about to
      arrive.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Nor would I permit it,&rdquo; said Danton. &ldquo;Between us we must resolve the
      riddle of how to extinguish M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr and his friends.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Who?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Sharp as a pistol-shot came that question, as Danton was turning away. The
      tone of it brought him up short. He turned again, Le Chapelier with him.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I said M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What has he to do with the proposal you were making me?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;He? Why, he is the phlebotomist in chief.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      And Le Chapelier added. &ldquo;It is he who killed Lagron.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Not a friend of yours, is he?&rdquo; wondered Danton.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And it is La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr you desire me to kill?&rdquo; asked Andre-Louis very
      slowly, after the manner of one whose thoughts are meanwhile pondering the
      subject.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;That&rsquo;s it,&rdquo; said Danton. &ldquo;And not a job for a prentice hand, I can assure
      you.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Ah, but this alters things,&rdquo; said Andre-Louis, thinking aloud. &ldquo;It offers
      a great temptation.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Why, then...?&rdquo; The Colossus took a step towards him again.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Wait!&rdquo; He put up his hand. Then with chin sunk on his breast, he paced
      away to the window, musing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier and Danton exchanged glances, then watched him, waiting, what
      time he considered.
    </p>
    <p>
      At first he almost wondered why he should not of his own accord have
      decided upon some such course as this to settle that long-standing account
      of M. de La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr. What was the use of this great skill in fence
      that he had come to acquire, unless he could turn it to account to avenge
      Vilmorin, and to make Aline safe from the lure of her own ambition? It
      would be an easy thing to seek out La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, put a mortal affront
      upon him, and thus bring him to the point. To-day this would be murder,
      murder as treacherous as that which La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr had done upon Philippe
      de Vilmorin; for to-day the old positions were reversed, and it was
      Andre-Louis who might go to such an assignation without a doubt of the
      issue. It was a moral obstacle of which he made short work. But there
      remained the legal obstacle he had expounded to Danton. There was still a
      law in France; the same law which he had found it impossible to move
      against La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr, but which would move briskly enough against
      himself in like case. And then, suddenly, as if by inspiration, he saw the
      way&mdash;a way which if adopted would probably bring La Tour d&rsquo;Azyr to a
      poetic justice, bring him, insolent, confident, to thrust himself upon
      Andre-Louis&rsquo; sword, with all the odium of provocation on his own side.
    </p>
    <p>
      He turned to them again, and they saw that he was very pale, that his
      great dark eyes glowed oddly.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;There will probably be some difficulty in finding a suppleant for this
      poor Lagron,&rdquo; he said. &ldquo;Our fellow-countrymen will be none so eager to
      offer themselves to the swords of Privilege.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;True enough,&rdquo; said Le Chapelier gloomily; and then, as if suddenly
      leaping to the thing in Andre-Louis&rsquo; mind: &ldquo;Andre!&rdquo; he cried. &ldquo;Would
      you...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;It is what I was considering. It would give me a legitimate place in the
      Assembly. If your Tour d&rsquo;Azyrs choose to seek me out then, why, their
      blood be upon their own heads. I shall certainly do nothing to discourage
      them.&rdquo; He smiled curiously. &ldquo;I am just a rascal who tries to be honest&mdash;Scaramouche
      always, in fact; a creature of sophistries. Do you think that Ancenis
      would have me for its representative?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Will it have Omnes Omnibus for its representative?&rdquo; Le Chapelier was
      laughing, his countenance eager. &ldquo;Ancenis will be convulsed with pride. It
      is not Rennes or Nantes, as it might have been had you wished it. But it
      gives you a voice for Brittany.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I should have to go to Ancenis...&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;No need at all. A letter from me to the Municipality, and the
      Municipality will confirm you at once. No need to move from here. In a
      fortnight at most the thing can be accomplished. It is settled, then?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Andre-Louis considered yet a moment. There was his academy. But he could
      make arrangements with Le Duc and Galoche to carry it on for him whilst
      himself directing and advising. Le Duc, after all, was become a thoroughly
      efficient master, and he was a trustworthy fellow. At need a third
      assistant could be engaged.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Be it so,&rdquo; he said at last.
    </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier clasped hands with him and became congratulatorily voluble,
      until interrupted by the red-coated giant at the door.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What exactly does it mean to our business, anyway?&rdquo; he asked. &ldquo;Does it
      mean that when you are a representative you will not scruple to skewer M.
      le Marquis?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;If M. le Marquis should offer himself to be skewered, as he no doubt
      will.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;I perceive the distinction,&rdquo; said M. Danton, and sneered. &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve an
      ingenious mind.&rdquo; He turned to Le Chapelier. &ldquo;What did you say he was to
      begin with&mdash;a lawyer, wasn&rsquo;t it?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Yes, I was a lawyer, and afterwards a mountebank.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;And this is the result!&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;As you say. And do you know that we are after all not so dissimilar, you
      and I?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;What?&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;Once like you I went about inciting other people to go and kill the man I
      wanted dead. You&rsquo;ll say I was a coward, of course.&rdquo;
     </p>
    <p>
      Le Chapelier prepared to slip between them as the clouds gathered on the
      giant&rsquo;s brow. Then these were dispelled again, and the great laugh
      vibrated through the long room.
    </p>
    <p>
      &ldquo;You&rsquo;ve touched me for the second time, and in the same place. Oh, you can
      fence, my lad. We should be friends. Rue des Cordeliers is my address. Any&mdash;scoundrel
      will tell you where Danton lodges. Desmoulins lives underneath. Come and
      visit us one evening. There&rsquo;s always a bottle for a friend.&rdquo;
     </p>

</section></body></html>
